%% $OpenXM$
%% xetex mt_mm-en.texi   (.texi までつける. ) 
%% @math{tex形式の数式} 
%% 参考: http://www.fan.gr.jp/~ring/doc/texinfo/texinfo-ja_14.html#SEC183
%% @tex{tex形式で書いたもの} 
%%https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/html_node/_0040TeX-_0040LaTeX.html

%% 英語版, 以下コメントは @comment で始める.  \input texinfo 以降は普通の tex 命令は使えない.
\input texinfo-ja
@iftex
@catcode`@#=6
@def@fref#1{@xrefX[#1,,@code{#1},,,]}
@def@b#1{{@bf #1}}
@catcode`@#=@other
@end iftex
@overfullrule=0pt
@documentlanguage en
@c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment --- おまじない終り ---

@comment --- GNU info ファイルの名前 ---
@setfilename asir-contrib-mt_mm_man

@comment --- タイトル ---
@settitle GKZ hypergeometric system

@comment --- おまじない ---
@ifinfo
@macro fref{name}
@ref{\name\,,@code{\name\}}
@end macro
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@comment --- おまじない終り ---

@comment --- タイトル, バージョン, 著者名, 著作権表示 ---
@title Macaulay matrix method for GKZ hypergeometric systems
@subtitle Pfaffian system (Pfaff equation) and Restriction
@subtitle Version 0.7
@subtitle March 26, 2023

@author  by S-J. Matsubara-Heo, N.Takayama
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} Risa/Asir committers
2004--2023. All rights reserved.
@end titlepage

@comment --- おまじない ---
@synindex vr fn
@comment --- おまじない終り ---

@comment --- @node は GNU info, HTML 用 ---
@comment --- @node  の引数は node-name,  next,  previous,  up ---
@node Top,, (dir), (dir)

@comment --- @menu は GNU info, HTML 用 ---
@comment --- chapter 名を正確に並べる ---

@menu
* About this document::
* Pfaff equation::
* Invariant subvector space::
* Moser reduction::
* Restriction::
* Index::
@end menu

@comment ---------- New Chapter  ---------------
@comment --- 親 chapter 名を正確に. 親がない場合は Top ---
@node About this document,,, Top
@chapter About this document

This document explains Risa/Asir functions for Macaulay matrix method for GKZ hypergeometric systems
(A-hypergeometric systems). @*    @comment 強制改行
Loading the package:
@example
import("mt_mm.rr");
@end example
@noindent
References cited in this document.
@itemize @bullet
@item [amp2022a] 
V.Chestnov, F.Gasparotto, M.K.Mandal, P.Mastrolia, S.J.Matsubara-Heo, H.J.Munch, N.Takayama, Macaulay Matrix for Feynman Integrals: Linear Relations and Intersection Numbers, 
@url{https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2022)18}.
E-attachments can be obtainable at
@uref{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM/Math/amp-MM}
@item [amp2023a] 
V.Chestnov, F.Gasparotto, M.K.Mandal, P.Mastrolia, S.J.Matsubara-Heo, H.J.Munch, N.Takayama, Restrictions of Pfaffian Systems for Feynman Integrals.
@url{In preparation}.
E-attachments can be obtainable at
@uref{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM/Math/amp-Restriction}
@item [Barkatou2017]
M.Barkatou, Symbolic Methods for Solving Systems of Linear Ordinary Differential
Equations (tutorial slides).
@url{https://www.impan.pl/~slawek/pisa/Barkatou_p.pdf}
@end itemize



@comment ---------- New Chapter  ---------------
@comment --- 親 chapter 名を正確に. 親がない場合は Top ---
@node Pfaff equation,,, Top
@chapter Pfaff equation

@menu
* mt_mm.find_macaulay::
@end menu

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function find_macaulay
@node mt_mm.find_macaulay,,, Pfaff equation
@section @code{mt_mm.find_macaulay}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.find_macaulay

@table @t
@item mt_mm.find_macaulay(@var{Ideal},@var{Std},@var{Xvars})
:: It returns a Macaulay type matrix for the @var{Ideal} with respect to
the standard basis @var{Std}.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
Data for Macaulay matrix.
@item Ideal
Generators of an ideal. It should be a list of distributed polynomials.
@item Std
Standard basis of the ideal @var{Ideal}.
It should be a list of distributed polynomials.
@item Xvars
Independent variables
@item Option
deg, which is the starting degree of the Macaulay matrix.
@item Option
p, which is the prime number for the probabilistic rank check.
@item Option
restriction_var,
which constructs a Macaulay matrix to obtain Pfaffian equations for restriction automatically.
@item Option
restriction_cond,
which is a non-automatic setting to construct a Macaulay matrix for restriction.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize〜@end itemize は箇条書き ---
@comment --- @bullet は黒点付き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
The data for Macaulay matrix is a list of length 4.
The list is [M_1,M_2,Extra,Std].
M_1 and M_2 are @math{M_{\rm Ext}} and @math{M_{\rm Std}}
in the Section 4 of [amp2022a] respectively.
Extra and Std are @math{{\rm Ext}} and @math{{\rm Std}}
in the Section 4 of [amp2022a] respectively.
@item 
A Macaulay matrix is obtained by applying
differential monomials @math{\partial^a}, |a|<=d
to generators of the ideal @var{Ideal}
where d is a (given) degree.
In the default setting, the degree d is automatically
increased until the Macaulay matrix is solvable.
@item
Here is a quick summary of the Section 4 of [amp2022a]. 
Let Std be a column vector of a standard basis and Ext a column vector of differential monomials appearing the Macaulay matrix other than Std.
When we have a Macaulay matrix of sufficiently
large degree, there exists a matrix C of rational
function entries satisfying the identity
d_i Std - P_i*Std
= C*(M_1*Ext + M_2*Std),
which is 0 modulo @var{Ideal},
where P_i is the Pfaffian matrix and d_i is
the partial differential operator with respect
to the i-th variable.
d_i Std can be expressed as
C'_1*Ext+C'_2*Std
where C'_1 and C'_2 are a matrix with 0, 1 entries.
It follows from the identity that we have
C'_1=C*M_1
and
C'_2-P_i=C*M_2.
Finding a matrix C, we obtain the Pfaffian matrix
P_i.
@item 
The global variable @var{NT_ES} stores all differentials of @var{Std}
(standard monomials) minus @var{Std} in the distributed polynomial format.
For example, when @var{Std} is [1,dx,dx*dy,dy],
@var{NT_ES} is [dx^2,dx^2*y,dx*dy^2,dy^2].
@code{mt_mm.get_NT_ES()} returns the value of @var{NT_ES}.
@item
The option @code{restriction_var} is a list of varabiles to restrict.
These variables are set to zero and @var{NT_ES} are set by using only
non-restricted variables.
For example, when @code{Xvars=[x,y,z]; restriction_var=[y,z];},
the variables @var{y}, @var{z} are set to zero and only @var{dx} is applied to 
@var{Std}.
@item
The option @code{restriction_cond} is a list of a list of variables
applying to @var{Std} and a list of restriction rules.
For example, when 
@code{Xvars=[r1,r2,y1,y2]; restriction_cond=[[r1,r2],[[r1,1/4],[r2,1/5],[y1,1],[y2,0]]]},
the operators @var{dr1} and @var{dr2} are applied to @var{Std}
to construct @var{NT_ES} and the restriction
@code{[[r1,1/4],[r2,1/5],[y1,1],[y2,0]]} is performed.
@item
@code{mt_mm.get_NT_info()[3]} returns the argument to construct the Macaulay
matrix. 
This information may be used when the option @var{restriction_cond} is used.
For example, when
@code{Xvars=[r,y]; restriction_cond=[[r],[[r,1/4],[y,1/5]]]},
the returned @var{MData} is restricted to @code{[[r,1/4],[y,1/5]]}.
In order to get non-restrected MData, we may input
@code{mt_mm.my_macaulay(Ideal,Std,Deg,length(Xvars) | restriction_cond=[[r],[]]);} where @var{Deg} is given in @code{mt_mm.get_NT_info()[3][3]}.
@end itemize

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example: 
Macaulay matrix of 
@math{ x_1 \partial_1 + 2 x_2 \partial_2 -b_1, \partial_1^2-\partial_2}
with respect to the standard monomials @math{1, \partial_2}.
The PDE is the GKZ system for the 1 by 2 matrix @math{A=[1,2]}.
@example
/* We input the followings */
import("mt_mm.rr");
Ideal=[x1*dx1+2*x2*dx2-b1,dx1^2-dx2]$
Std=[<<0,0>>,<<0,1>>]$ Xvars=[x1,x2]$
Id = map(dp_ptod,Ideal,poly_dvar(Xvars));
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);
P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,1 | use_orig=1);
P2=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,2 | use_orig=1);

[3404] 
--- snip ---
[3405] [[(b1)/(x1),(-2*x2)/(x1)],
        [(1/2*b1^2-1/2*b1)/(x1*x2),((-b1+1)*x2-1/2*x1^2)/(x1*x2)]]  // P1
[3406] [[0,1],
        [(-1/4*b1^2+1/4*b1)/(x2^2),((b1-3/2)*x2+1/4*x1^2)/(x2^2)]] // P2
@end example
@noindent
Note that Macaulay matrix method might give a fake answer
under some situations.
For example, we input the following non-integrable system.
In other words, the @var{Ideal} below is the trivial ideal.
We also input a wrong standard basis @var{Std}.
@example
/* We input the followings */
Ideal=[x1*dx1+x2*dx2-b1,dx1^2-dx2]$
Std=[<<0,0>>,<<0,1>>]$ Xvars=[x1,x2]$
Id = map(dp_ptod,Ideal,poly_dvar(Xvars));
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);
P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,1 | use_orig=1);
P2=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,2 | use_orig=1);
nd_weyl_gr(Ideal,[x1,x2,dx1,dx2],0,0);

[3240] import("mt_mm.rr");
--- snip ---
[3542] MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);

We use a probabilistic method for rank_check with P=65537
Warning: prules are ignored.
--- snip ---
NT_info=[rank,[row, col]( of m=transposed MData[0]),indep_columns(L[2])]
Rank=6
The matrix is full rank.
We use a probabilistic method to compute the rank of a matrix with entries of rational functions.
The output is a macaulay matrix of degree 1
--- snip ---
[rank=6,[row,col]=[6,6] (size of t(M1)),Indep_cols] is stored in the variable NT_info.
--- snip ---
[[[0,0,0,0,0,x1],[0,0,1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,x1,x2,0],[0,1,0,0,-1,0],
 [0,0,x1,x2,0,-b1+1],[1,0,0,-1,0,0]],
[[-b1,x2],[0,-1],[0,-b1+1],[0,0],[0,0],[0,0]],
[(1)*<<3,0>>,(1)*<<2,1>>,(1)*<<2,0>>,(1)*<<1,1>>,(1)*<<0,2>>,(1)*<<1,0>>],
[(1)*<<0,0>>,(1)*<<0,1>>]]

[3543] P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,1 | use_orig=1);
[[(b1)/(x1),(-x2)/(x1)],[(b1^2-b1)/(x1*x2),((-b1+1)*x2-x1^2)/(x1*x2)]]

// d/dx1 - P1
[3544] P2=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,2 | use_orig=1);
[[0,1],[(-b1^2+b1)/(x2^2),((2*b1-2)*x2+x1^2)/(x2^2)]]
// d/dx2 - P2
[2545] nd_weyl_gr(Ideal,[x1,x2,dx1,dx2],0,0);
[-1]  // But it is a trivial ideal!
@end example
@*
@noindent
Let us go back to our running example.
Homogenity is reduced by @code{mt_gkz.gkz_b}.
@code{Id0} is an ODE.
@example
/* We input the followings. */
A=[[1,2]]$ Beta=[b1]$ Sigma=[2]$
Id0=mt_gkz.gkz_b(A,Beta,Sigma|partial=1)$
Xvars=[x2]$
Id=map(mt_mm.remove_redundancy,Id0,Xvars);
Std=[1,dx2]$ Std=map(dp_ptod,Std,[dx2])$
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);
P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,1 | use_orig=1);



[3244] A=[[1,2]]$ Beta=[b1]$ Sigma=[2]$
Id0=mt_gkz.gkz_b(A,Beta,Sigma|partial=1)$
Xvars=[x2]$
Id=map(mt_mm.remove_redundancy,Id0,Xvars);
[3245] [3246] [3247] [3248] 
[3249] [(x1^2)*<<2>>+(1/2*x1^3)*<<1>>+(-1/2*b1*x1^2)*<<0>>]
      // This is the ODE. 

[3252] Std=[1,dx2]$ Std=map(dp_ptod,Std,[dx2])$
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);

[3253] [3254] We use a probabilistic method for rank_check with P=65537
Warning: prules are ignored.
--- snip ---
NT_info=[rank,[row, col]( of m=transposed MData[0]),indep_columns(L[2])]
Rank=2
The matrix is full rank.
We use a probabilistic method to compute the rank of a matrix with entries of rational functions.
The output is a macaulay matrix of degree 1
To draw a picture of the rref of the Macaulay matrix, use Util/show_mat with tmp-mm-*-M-transposed*.bin
[Std,Xvars] is stored in tmp-mm-9823-Std-Xvars.ab
[ES,Xvars] is stored in tmp-mm-9823-Es-Xvars.ab
[rank=2,[row,col]=[2,2] (size of t(M1)),Indep_cols] is stored in the variable NT_info.
NT_info is stored in tmp-mm-9823-NT_info.ab
MData is stored in tmp-mm-9823-mdata.ab

[[[0,x1^2],[x1^2,1/2*x1^3]],
 [[-1/2*b1*x1^2,1/2*x1^3],[0,-1/2*b1*x1^2]],
 [(1)*<<3>>,(1)*<<2>>],
 [(1)*<<0>>,(1)*<<1>>]]
[3255] P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,1 | use_orig=1);
[[0,1],[1/2*b1,-1/2*x1]]
// d/d<<1>> - P1
[3256] 
@end example
@noindent
When the parameters and independent variables are numbers, we can call @code{find_pfaffian_fast}.
@example
/* We input the followings. */
A=[[1,2]]$ Beta=[1/2]$ Sigma=[2]$
Id0=mt_gkz.gkz_b(A,Beta,Sigma|partial=1)$
Xvars=[x2]$
Id=map(mt_mm.remove_redundancy,Id0,Xvars)$
Std=[1,dx2]$ Std=map(dp_ptod,Std,[dx2])$
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars);
P1=mt_mm.find_pfaffian_fast(MData,Xvars,1,mt_mm.get_indep_cols() | xrules=[[x1,1/3]]);

--- snip ---
[3300] Generate a data for linsolv.
Sol rank=2
cmd=time /home/nobuki/bin/linsolv   --vars tmp-mm-9823-linsolv-vars.txt  <tmp-mm-9823-linsolv.txt >tmp-mm-9823-linsolv-ans.txt
--- snip ---
#time of linsolv=0.00681901
Time(find_pfaffian_fast)=0.002101 seconds
[3304] P1;
[[0,1],[1/4,-1/6]]
@end example

@*
Example of finding a restriction:
We consider a left ideal generated by
@math{\partial_x (\theta_x + c_{01}-1) - (\theta_x+\theta_y+a) (\theta_x+b_{02})}
and
@math{\partial_y (\theta_y + c_{11}-1) - (\theta_x+\theta_y+a) (\theta_y+b_{12})}
where @math{\theta_x = x \partial_x}
The Appell function F2 satisfies it.
We try to find the restriction to x=0.
We input the following commands. 
@comment Prog: testr11(2,1) of rest2.rr
@example
Ideal=[(-x^2+x)*dx^2+(-y*x*dy+(-a-b_02-1)*x+c_01)*dx-b_02*y*dy-b_02*a,
       (-y*x*dy-b_12*x)*dx+(-y^2+y)*dy^2+((-a-b_12-1)*y+c_11)*dy-b_12*a]$
Xvars=[x,y]$
Std=[(1)*<<0,0>>,(1)*<<0,1>>]$ 
Id = map(dp_ptod,Ideal,poly_dvar(Xvars))$
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,Std,Xvars | restriction_var=[x]); 
P2=mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,2 | use_orig=1);
// Std is a standard basis for the restricted system.
@end example
@noindent
Then, we have the following output.
@example
[3618] We use a probabilistic method for rank_check with P=65537
--- snip ---
Rank=6
Have allocated 0 M bytes.
0-th rank condition is OK.
We use a probabilistic method to compute the rank of a matrix with entries of rational functions.
The output is a macaulay matrix of degree 1
--- snip ---
[rank=6,[row,col]=[8,6] (size of t(M1)),Indep_cols] is stored in the variable NT_info.
[[[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,c_01],[0,0,0,0,0,0,-y^2+y,0],[0,0,0,0,0,c_01,-b_02*y,0],
  [0,0,0,-y^2+y,0,0,(-a-b_12-3)*y+c_11+1,0],
  [0,0,0,0,c_01+1,(-b_02-1)*y,0,(-b_02-1)*a-b_02-1],
  [0,0,-y^2+y,0,0,(-a-b_12-2)*y+c_11,0,-b_12*a-b_12]],

 [[-b_02*a,-b_02*y],[-b_12*a,(-a-b_12-1)*y+c_11],[0,-b_02*a-b_02],
  [0,(-b_12-1)*a-b_12-1],[0,0],[0,0]],

 [(1)*<<3,0>>,(1)*<<2,1>>,(1)*<<1,2>>,(1)*<<0,3>>,(1)*<<2,0>>,(1)*<<1,1>>,
  (1)*<<0,2>>,(1)*<<1,0>>],
 [(1)*<<0,0>>,(1)*<<0,1>>]]

[3619] [[0,1],[(-b_12*a)/(y^2-y),((-a-b_12-1)*y+c_11)/(y^2-y)]]
@end example

@*
An example of finding a restriction on the singular locus:
We consider the system of differential equations
for the Appell function @math{F_4(a,b,c_{01},c_{11};x,y)},
which is @var{Id_p} below.
The curve @math{xy((x-y)^2-2(x+y)+1)=0} is the singular locus of this
system and @math{(x,y)=(1/4,1/4)} is on the locus.
Let @var{F} be a holomorphic solution around the point.
The values of @code{poly_dact(dx*dy,F,[x,y]),poly_dact(dx^2,F,[x,y]),poly_dact(dy^2,F,[x,y])} (parial derivatives of @var{f})
can be obtained from the values of
@code{poly_dact(1,F,[x,y]),poly_dact(dx,F,[x,y]),poly_dact(dy,F,[x,y])}
(standing for @code{Std})
on the singular locus
by the Macaulay matrix in @code{MData2} by executing
the following codes.
@example
Id_p=[(-x^2+x)*dx^2+(-2*y*x*dy+(-a-b-1)*x+c_01)*dx-y^2*dy^2+(-a-b-1)*y*dy-b*a,
 -x^2*dx^2+(-2*y*x*dy+(-a-b-1)*x)*dx+(-y^2+y)*dy^2+((-a-b-1)*y+c_11)*dy-b*a];
Xvars=[x,y];
//Restriction at x=y=1/4 included in sing (x-y)^2-2(x+y)+1
Std=map(dp_ptod,[1,dx,dy],[dx,dy])$       // It suceeds at degree 1.
MData=mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id_p,Std,Xvars | restriction_cond=[[x,y],[[x,1/4],[y,1/4]]])$
Args=mt_mm.get_NT_info()[3]$
yang.define_ring(["partial",Xvars])$
MData2=mt_mm.my_macaulay(map(dp_ptod,Id_p,Dvars),Std,Args[3],Args[4]
    | restriction_cond=[[x,y],[]])$
@end example

@*

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.find_pfaffian_fast}
@ref{mt_mm.find_pfaffian}
@ref{mt_mm.find_macaulay}
@end table
@comment mt_mm.find_macaulay の説明おわり. あとはこれの繰り返し.

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function my_macaulay
@node mt_mm.my_macaulay,,, Pfaff equation
@section @code{mt_mm.my_macaulay}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.my_macaulay

@table @t
@item mt_mm.my_macaulay(@var{Id},@var{Std},@var{Deg},@var{N})
:: Multipy all differential operators upto @var{Deg} to @var{Id} and return a Macaulay matrix.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
[M1,M2,Ext,Std],  M1*Ext+M2*Std=0 modulo @var{Id} holds.
@item Id
A list of generators of the ideal by the distributed polynomial format.
Independent variables must be x1, x2, x3, ...
@item Std
A list of Standard monomials by the distributed polynomial format.
@item Deg
Degree to generate a Macaulay matrix.
@item N
N is the number of differential variables = the size of the distributed polynomials=the number of independent variables.
@item option
restriction_var, see @ref{mt_mm.find_macaulay}.
@item option
restriction_cond, see @ref{mt_mm.find_macaulay}.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
This function is for an internal use.
@item 
This function is called from the function mt_mm.find_macaulay.
The function mt_mm.find_macaulay also calls the function mt_mm.rank_check_ff
with base_set_minus([dxi*Std | for all i], Std), whose value is obtained
by ES=mt_mm.get_NT_ES().
When the system equations by the Macaulay matrix can be solved with respect
to ES, we are done.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example:  Consider the left ideal generated by
@math{x_1 \partial_1 - 1/2, x_2 \partial_2 - 1/3}.
Input the following codes.
@example
import("mt_mm.rr");
yang.define_ring(["partial",[x1,x2]]);
Id=[x1*<<2,0>>-1/2, x2*<<0,1>>-1/3];
Std=[<<0,0>>,<<1,0>>];
T0=mt_mm.my_macaulay(Id,Std,0,2);
T1=mt_mm.my_macaulay(Id,Std,1,2);
@end example
Then, we have
@example
[3988] T0;
[[[x1,0],[0,x2]],
 [[-1/2,0],[-1/3,0]],
 [(1)*<<2,0>>,(1)*<<0,1>>],
 [(1)*<<0,0>>,(1)*<<1,0>>]]
[3989] T1;
[[[0,0,x1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,0,0,x2],[0,x1,0,0,0,-1/2],[0,0,0,0,x2,2/3],
  [x1,0,1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,x2,0,0]],

 [[-1/2,0],[-1/3,0],[0,0],[0,0],[0,-1/2],[0,-1/3]],

 [(1)*<<3,0>>,(1)*<<2,1>>,(1)*<<2,0>>,(1)*<<1,1>>,(1)*<<0,2>>,(1)*<<0,1>>],
 [(1)*<<0,0>>,(1)*<<1,0>>]]
@end example
For example, the 5th rows of T1[0] and T1[1], stands for
@math{\partial_1 (x_1 \partial_1^2 - 1/2)=
x_1 \partial_1^3 + \partial_1^2 - 1/2 \partial_1}.

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.find_macaulay}
@end table
@comment ---end function my_macaulay 

@comment ---------- New Chapter  ---------------
@node Invariant subvector space,,, Top
@chapter Invariant subvector space

@menu
* mt_mm.ediv_set_field::
@end menu

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function ediv_set_field
@node mt_mm.ediv_set_field,,, Invariant subvector space
@section @code{mt_mm.ediv_set_field}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.ediv_set_field

@table @t
@item mt_mm.ediv_set_field(@var{Mode})
:: It sets the type of coefficient field.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item Mode
When @var{Mode} is 1, the elementary divisor is factorized in @math{{\bf Q}[x]} (rational number coefficient polynomial ring).
Here x can be changed by setting the global variable @var{InvX}
by calling @code{mt_mm.set_InvX(X)}.
When @var{Mode} is 0, the elementary divisor is factorized in @math{{\bf Q}(a,b,\ldots)[x]}
where @math{a,b, \ldots} are parameter variables automatically determined
from the input.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜@end itemize は箇条書き ---

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.mat_inv_space}
@end table
@comment ---end ediv_set_field

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function mat_inv_space
@node mt_mm.mat_inv_space,,, Invariant subvector space
@section @code{mt_mm.mat_inv_space}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.mat_inv_space

@table @t
@item mt_mm.mat_inv_space(@var{Mat})
:: It returns sets of basis vectors of invariant subvector spaces of @var{Mat}
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
a list of sets of basis vectors of invariant subvector spaces by the action of
@var{Mat}.
@item Mat
A square matrix.
@item ediv
Option. When ediv=1, it returns [a list of sets of basis vectors,[ED,L,R]] where ED is the elementary divisor.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
Let @var{Mat} be a matrix of rational number entiries.
When the characteristic polynomial of the matrix @var{Mat}
can be factored over @math{{\bf Q}[x]} into first order polynomials,
it returns bases of eigen vector spaces.
In general, it returns bases of invariant subvector spaces 
corresponding to irreducible factors of the characteristic polynomial.
@item 
x is the reserved variable of computing the elementary divisor of @var{Mat}.
Then, x cannot be used as a parameter vector.
@item
Note that the returned basis does not give basis for the Jordan canonical form
in general
even when the characteristic polynomial is factored into first order polynomials.
@item
When When the option ediv=1 is given, it returns [a list of sets of basis vectors,[ED,L,R]].
Note that that the format of return value is changed.
L and R are matrices such that @math{L (x-A) R = D}
where @math{A} is the argument @var{Mat} and @math{D} is the matrix ED
whose diagonal consists of the elementary divisor.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example: We have 3 invariant subvector spaces of the 3 by 3 matrix L below. 
Then, the matrix can be diagonalized by them.
@example
[3118] import("invlin0.rr");
Base field is Q.
[3168] B=mt_mm.mat_inv_space(L=[[6,-3,-7],[-1,2,1],[5,-3,-6]]);
[[[ -2/25 2/25 -2/25 ]],[[ 6/25 3/25 3/25 ]],[[ -1/25 0 -1/25 ]]]
[3170] length(B);
3
[3171] L=newmat(3,3,L);
[ 6 -3 -7 ]
[ -1 2 1 ]
[ 5 -3 -6 ]
[3174] P=matrix_transpose(newmat(3,3,[vtol(B[0][0]),vtol(B[1][0]),vtol(B[2][0])]));
[ -2/25 6/25 -1/25 ]
[ 2/25 3/25 0 ]
[ -2/25 3/25 -1/25 ]
[3176] matrix_inverse(P)*L*P;
[ 2 0 0 ]
[ 0 1 0 ]
[ 0 0 -1 ]
[3177] map(print,check5(L))$ // The above can be done by check5.
[[[ -2/25 2/25 -2/25 ]],[[ 6/25 3/25 3/25 ]],[[ -1/25 0 -1/25 ]]]
// invariant subvector spaces.

[ -2/25 6/25 -1/25 ]
[ 2/25 3/25 0 ]
[ -2/25 3/25 -1/25 ]
// transformation matrix

[ 2 0 0 ]
[ 0 1 0 ]
[ 0 0 -1 ]
// diagonalized matrix

[3178] B=mat_inv_space(L | ediv=1)$
[3179] B[1][0];  // The elementary divisor is the diagonal.
[ 1 0 0 ]
[ 0 6/25 0 ]
[ 0 0 x^3-2*x^2-x+2 ]
[3180] fctr(B[1][0][2][2]);
[[1,1],[x-2,1],[x-1,1],[x+1,1]]
@end example

@noindent
Example: The characteristic polynomial is factored into @math{(x^2+1)^2}
in @math{{\bf Q}[x]}. Then, we obtain two invariant subspaces.
@example
[3196] B=mt_mm.mat_inv_space([[0,-1,0,0],[1,0,0,0],[0,0,0,1],[0,0,-1,0]]);
[[[ 1 0 0 0 ],[ 0 1 0 0 ]],[[ 0 0 1 0 ],[ 0 0 0 -1 ]]]
[3197] length(B);
2
@end example

@noindent
Example: Block diagonalization. The matrix L is congruent to 
@math{\pmatrix{1&0&0\cr 0&2&1\cr 0&0&2\cr}}.
@example
[3352] L=matrix_list_to_matrix([[4,0,1],[2,3,2],[0,-2,0]]);
[ 4 0 1 ]
[ 2 3 2 ]
[ 0 -2 0 ]
[3348] B=mt_mm.check5(L);
[[[[ 4 6 -4 ]],[[ -3 -6 4 ],[ -8 -16 12 ]]],[ 4 -3 -8 ]
[ 6 -6 -16 ]
[ -4 4 12 ],[ 3 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 -4 ]
[ 0 1 4 ]]
[3350] B[0];
[[[ 4 6 -4 ]],[[ -3 -6 4 ],[ -8 -16 12 ]]]
[3351] map(length,B[0]);
[1,2]    
//There are one dimensional and two dimensional invariant subspaces for L
[3353] matrix_inverse(B[1])*L*B[1];
[ 3 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 -4 ]
[ 0 1 4 ]
[3354] B[2];
[ 3 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 -4 ]
[ 0 1 4 ]
// the matrix L is block diagonalized as 1 by 1 matrix and 2 by 2 matrix.
[3355] 
@end example

@noindent
Example: When the matrix contains parameters, you need to change the base field.
L below is congruent to @math{\pmatrix{a&1\cr 0&1\cr}}.
@example
[3110] import("mt_mm.rr");
[3111] mt_mm.ediv_set_field(0);
Base field is Q(params). 
Warning: computation over Q(params) may require huge memory space and time.
0
[3112] B=mt_mm.mat_inv_space(L=[[a-6,-8],[9/2,a+6]]);
[[[ 1 0 ],[ a-6 9/2 ]]]
[3113] length(B);
1   // one invariant subvector space for the linear map L
[3357] B=check5(L);
[[[[ 1 0 ],[ a-6 9/2 ]]],[ 1 a-6 ]
[ 0 9/2 ],[ 0 -a^2 ]
[ 1 2*a ]]
[3359] fctr(matrix_det(B[2]-x*matrix_identity_matrix(2)));
[[1,1],[x-a,2]] // characteristic polynomial is (x-a)^2
@end example

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.ediv_set_field}
@end table
@comment ---end function mat_inv_space 

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function is_integral_difference_sol
@comment --- 個々の関数の説明, 上のcomment ２行はmanの編集に便利なのでこの形式で書く. ---
@node mt_mm.is_integral_difference_sol,,, Invariant subvector space
@section @code{mt_mm.is_integral_difference_sol}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.is_integral_difference_sol

@table @t
@item mt_mm.is_integral_difference_sol(@var{F1},@var{F2})
:: Check if the irreducible polynomials @var{F1} and @var{F2} in x have
a common solution with integral difference.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
If there is a common solution with integral difference, it returns
[1,Y] where Y is an integer and x0+Y and x0 are solutions of @var{F1} and @var{F2} respectively.
If there is no such solution, it returns 0.
@item F1
A polynomial in x.
@item F2
A polynomial in x.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
@var{x} is the default value of @var{InvX}. It can be changed by the function
@code{mt_mm.set_InvX()}.
@item 
It called @code{poly_prime_dec} for the check.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example: Two examples of irreducible polynomials over Q and Q(a,b).
@example
[2695] is_integral_difference_sol(x^2+1,(x+@i+1)*(x-@i+1)); 
[1,-1]
[2696] is_integral_difference_sol(x^2+(b/(a+1))^2,(x-(b/(a+1))*@i+3)*(x+(b/(a+1))*@i+3));
[1,3]
@end example

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.mat_inv_space}
@ref{mt_mm.eDiv}
@ref{mt_mm.set_InvX}
@end table
@comment ---end function is_integral_difference_sol 


@comment ---------- New Chapter  ---------------
@node Moser reduction,,, Top
@chapter Moser reduction::

@menu
* mt_mm.moser_reduction::
@end menu

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function moser_reduction
@comment --- 個々の関数の説明, 上のcomment ２行はmanの編集に便利なのでこの形式で書く. ---
@node mt_mm.moser_reduction,,, Moser reduction
@section @code{mt_mm.moser_reduction}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.moser_reduction

@table @t
@item mt_mm.moser_reduction(@var{A},@var{X})
:: It returns the Moser reduced matrix of @var{A} with respect to @var{X}
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
Moser reduced matrix
@item A
Coefficient matrix of the ODE dF/d@var{X} - AF where F is an unknown vector valued function.
@item X
Independent variable of the ODE.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
It is an implementation of the Moser reduction algorithm presented in [Barkatou2017].
The Moser reduction algorithm translates a differential equation with the regular
singularity at the origin 
into a form of the coefficient matrix has only the simple pole at the origin.
We call the coefficient matrix the Moser reduced matrix.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example: the following input outputs the Moser reduced form A2[0] of A.
@example
import("mt_mm.rr");
A=newmat(4,4,[[-2/x,0,1/(x^2),0],
              [x^2,-(x^2-1)/x,x^2,-x^3],
              [0,x^(-2),x,0],
              [x^2,1/x,0,-(x^2+1)/x]]);
A2=mt_mm.moser_reduction(A,x);


[3405] A2;
[[ (-x^2-1)/(x) x^2 0 x ]
[ 0 (-2)/(x) (1)/(x) 0 ]
[ 0 0 (x^2-1)/(x) (1)/(x) ]
[ -x 1 x (-x^2-1)/(x) ],[ 0 1 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 0 x^2 ]
[ 0 0 x 0 ]
[ 1 0 0 0 ]]
// A2[1] gives the Gauge transformation to obtain the Moser reduced form.
[3406] A2[0]-mt_mm.gauge_transform(A,A2[1],x);
[ 0 0 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 0 0 ]
[ 0 0 0 0 ]
@end example

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.gauge_transform}
@end table
@comment ---end function moser_reduction 


@comment ---------- New Chapter  ---------------
@node Restriction,,, Top
@chapter Restriction::

@menu
* mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_::
* mt_mm.v_by_eset::
@end menu

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function restriction_to_pt_
@comment --- 個々の関数の説明, 上のcomment ２行はmanの編集に便利なのでこの形式で書く. ---
@node mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_,,, Restriction
@section @code{mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_

@table @t
@item mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_(@var{Ideal},@var{Gamma},@var{KK},@var{V})
:: It returns the restriction of @var{Ideal} to the origin by a probabilistic method.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
a list R. R[0]: a basis of the restriction. R[1]: column indices for the basis.
R[2]: a basis of @math{{\bf C}^{c(\gamma)}}. R[3]: echelon form of a matrix for the restriction.
@item Ideal
Generators of an ideal in the ring of differential operators
@item Gamma
Approximation parameter @math{\gamma} for the restriction.
In order to obtain the exact answer,
it must be larger than or equal to @math{{\rm max}(s_0,s_1)}
where @math{s_0} is the maximal non-negative root of b-function
and @math{s_1} is the maximal order with respect to (-1,1) weight
of the Groebner basis of the @var{Ideal}
@item KK
Approximation parameter @math{k} for the restriction.
This parameter must be larger than @math{\gamma}.
If @math{k} is sufficiently large, this function returns the exact answer.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
This function is an implementation of the Algorithm 4.7.
@item
The echelon form is computed by rational arithmetic by default.
When we give an option p=n, the echelon form is computed
in the finite field of size pari(nextprime,n).
@item
When the option save_mem=1 is given, it becomes slower to save memory.
@item
Parameters in @var{Ideal} should be replaced to rational numbers.
@item 
@math{c(\gamma)} is the number of monomials whose total degree is less than
or equal to @math{\gamma}.
For example, mt_mm.eset(3,[x,y]) returns of monomials of dx and dy
whose total degree is less than or equation to 3 and @math{c(3)=10}.
@item 
mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_by_linsolv accepts same argument and returns the result
in the same format. It computes the echelon form by linsolv.
When the option nproc=n is given, n processes are created to construct
a matrix for the restriction from the ideal.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Restriction of the system of Appell F1.
@example
[2077] import("mt_mm.rr");
[3599] Ideal=mt_mm.appell_F1();
  [(-x^2+x)*dx^2+((-y*x+y)*dy+(-a-b1-1)*x+c)*dx-b1*y*dy-b1*a,
   ((-y+1)*x*dy-b2*x)*dx+(-y^2+y)*dy^2+((-a-b2-1)*y+c)*dy-b2*a,
   ((x-y)*dy-b2)*dx+b1*dy]
[3600] Ideal2=base_replace(Ideal,[[a,1/2],[b1,1/3],[b2,1/5],[c,1/7]]);
  [(-x^2+x)*dx^2+((-y*x+y)*dy-11/6*x+1/7)*dx-1/3*y*dy-1/6,
   ((-y+1)*x*dy-1/5*x)*dx+(-y^2+y)*dy^2+(-17/10*y+1/7)*dy-1/10,
   ((x-y)*dy-1/5)*dx+1/3*dy]
[3601] T=mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_(Ideal2,3,4,[x,y] | p=10^10)$
[3602] T[0];
  [1]   // The basis of the restriction at the origin is {1}

[3604] Ideal3=base_replace(Ideal2,[[x,x+2],[y,y+3]]);
  [(-x^2-3*x-2)*dx^2+(((-y-3)*x-y-3)*dy-11/6*x-74/21)*dx+(-1/3*y-1)*dy-1/6,
   (((-y-2)*x-2*y-4)*dy-1/5*x-2/5)*dx+(-y^2-5*y-6)*dy^2+(-17/10*y-347/70)*dy-1/10,
   ((x-y-1)*dy-1/5)*dx+1/3*dy]
[3605] T3=mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_(Ideal3,3,4,[x,y] | p=10^10)$
[3606] T3[0];
  [dx,dy,1]   // The basis of the restrition at (x,y)=(2,3)
[3607] 
@end example


@noindent
Rational restriction of the system of Appell F2 to x=0.
The rank 2 system of ODE is stored in the variable P2.
@example
import("mt_mm.rr")$
Ideal = [(-x^2+x)*dx^2+(-y*x)*dx*dy+((-a-b1-1)*x+c1)*dx-b1*y*dy-b1*a,
         (-y^2+y)*dy^2+(-x*y)*dy*dx+((-a-b2-1)*y+c2)*dy-b2*x*dx-b2*a]$
Xvars = [x,y]$
//Rule for a probabilistic determination of RStd (Std for the restriction)
Rule=[[y,y+1/3],[a,1/2],[b1,1/3],[b2,1/5],[c1,1/7],[c2,1/11]]$
Ideal_p = base_replace(Ideal,Rule);
RStd=mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_by_linsolv(Ideal_p,Gamma=2,KK=4,[x,y]);
RStd=reverse(map(dp_ptod,RStd[0],[dx,dy]));
Id = map(dp_ptod,Ideal,poly_dvar(Xvars))$
MData = mt_mm.find_macaulay(Id,RStd,Xvars | restriction_var=[x]);
P2 = mt_mm.find_pfaffian(MData,Xvars,2 | use_orig=1);
end$
@end example

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.find_macaulay}
@end table
@comment ---end function restriction_to_pt_ 


@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function v_by_eset
@comment --- 個々の関数の説明, 上のcomment ２行はmanの編集に便利なのでこの形式で書く. ---
@node mt_mm.v_by_eset,,, Restriction
@section @code{mt_mm.v_by_eset}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.v_by_eset

@table @t
@item mt_mm.v_by_eset(@var{L},@var{Eset},@var{V})
:: It returns coefficients vector of @var{L} with respect to @var{Eset}
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
a list of coefficients of @var{L} with respect to @var{Eset}.
@item L
a differential operator.
@item Eset
a list of monomials of differential variable.
@item V
a list of variables.
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
@var{Eset} must be sorted in the descending order.
For example, [dx^2,dy*dx,dy^2,dx,dy,1] is OK, 
but [1,dy,dx,dy^2,dy*dx,dx^2] is not accepted.
@item
It returns coefficients of @var{L} with respect to @var{Eset}.
@item
This function is used for the preprocess of the function mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_.
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
@example
[1883] import("mt_mm.rr");
[3600] mt_mm.v_by_eset(x*dx+y*dy+a,reverse(mt_mm.eset(2,[x,y])),[x,y]);
  [ 0 0 0 x y a ]

[3601] Eset=mt_mm.eset(2,[x,y]);
  [1,dy,dx,dy^2,dy*dx,dx^2]
[3602] T=mt_mm.dshift_by_eset(x*dx+y*dy+a,Eset,[x,y]);
  // Eset is applied to x*dx+y*dy+a and the result is
 [x*dx+y*dy+a,
  x*dy*dx+y*dy^2+(a+1)*dy,
  x*dx^2+(y*dy+a+1)*dx,
  x*dy^2*dx+y*dy^3+(a+2)*dy^2,
  x*dy*dx^2+(y*dy^2+(a+2)*dy)*dx,
  x*dx^3+(y*dy+a+2)*dx^2]

[3603] T2=map(mt_mm.v_by_eset,T,reverse(mt_mm.eset(3,[x,y])),[x,y]);
[[ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 x y a ],[ 0 0 0 0 0 x y 0 a+1 0 ],
 [ 0 0 0 0 x y 0 a+1 0 0 ],[ 0 0 x y 0 0 a+2 0 0 0 ],
 [ 0 x y 0 0 a+2 0 0 0 0 ],[ x y 0 0 a+2 0 0 0 0 0 ]]
[3604] 
@end example


@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.restriction_to_pt_}
@end table
@comment ---end function v_by_eset 

@comment --- おまじない ---
@node Index,,, Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex fn
@printindex cp
@iftex
@vfill @eject
@end iftex
@summarycontents
@contents
@bye
@comment --- おまじない終り ---



@comment *********************************************************
@comment ********* template
@comment **********************************************************

@comment **********************************************************
@comment ---function pfaff_eq
@comment --- 個々の関数の説明, 上のcomment ２行はmanの編集に便利なのでこの形式で書く. ---
@node mt_mm.pfaff_eq,,, Chapter_name
@section @code{mt_mm.pfaff_eq}
@comment --- 索引用キーワード
@findex mt_mm.pfaff_eq

@table @t
@item mt_mm.pfaff_eq(@var{A},@var{Beta},@var{Ap},@var{Rvec},@var{DirX})
:: It returns the Pfaff equation for the GKZ system defined by @var{A} and @var{Beta} with respect to cocycles defined by @var{Rvec}.
@end table

@comment --- 引数の簡単な説明 --- 
@table @var
@item return
a list of coefficients of the Pfaff equation with respect to the direction @var{DirX} 
@item A
the matrix A of the GKZ system.
@item Beta
???
@end table

@comment --- ここで関数の詳しい説明 ---
@comment --- @itemize @bullet 〜 @end itemize は箇条書き ---
@itemize @bullet
@item 
The independent variables are @code{x1,x2,x3,...} (@math{x_1, x_2, x_3, \ldots}).
@verbatim
One can use verbatim.
@end verbatim
@item 
???
@end itemize

@comment @* は強制改行.

@comment --- @example〜@end example は実行例の表示 ---
@noindent
Example: Gauss hypergeometric system, see [amp2022a] example ??.
@example
[1883] import("mt_mm.rr");
@end example

@comment --- 参照(リンク)を書く ---
@table @t
@item Refer to
@ref{mt_mm.pfaff_eq}
@end table
@comment ---end function pfaff_eq 
