.C $OpenXM$
.TH SM1 1 "28 February 2000"
.SH NAME
sm1 \-  Computer algebra system for the ring of differential operators
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sm1
.RB [ -f 
.IR filename ]
.RB [ -standardmacros ]
.RB [ -q ]
.RB [ -s
.IR command strings ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The system kan/sm1 is a Grobner engine specialized especially
to the ring of differential operators with a subset of
Postscript language.
It is designed to be a back-end engine for a 
heterotic distributed computing system.
However, it is not difficult to control kan/sm1 directly.
Its basic data types are
.TP
integers, polynomials (differential operators)
.PP
and lists.


.SH OPTIONS
The following command line options are available:
.TP
.B \-f " filename"
Execute a file. Do not start with an interactive mode.
.TP
.B \-standardmacros
Do not execute startup macros.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode. 
.TP
.BI \-s " command string"
Upon startup, sm1 executes the command string.

.SH USE
.TP
.B ?
to get a list of primitives.
.TP
.B ??
to get a list of standard macros.
.TP
.B quit
(or \\q), or
.B EOF
(Ctrl-D) to quit
.TP
.B A sample input:
.TP
(cohom.sm1) run
.TP
[[ (x Dx + y Dy + 1) (x Dx y Dy-4) ] [(x) (y)] [[(Dy) 1]]] gb ::
.TP

.SH MANUALS
The following material is included in the standard distribution (originally
in TeX format) in the Doc directory:
.TP
.I The kan/sm1 Operators reference
(onlinehelp.dvi)
.TP
.I Kan/sm1, a tutorial
(ttt.dvi):

.SH FILES
.TP
.I sm1
main executable
.I lib/*.sm1
library files

.SH PRIMARY FTP SITE
The most recent distributions can be found at
.RS
.I ftp://ftp.math.sci.kobe-u.ac.jpr/pub/OpenXM/*/OpenXM01.tgz
.RE

Tips, development and info are found at
OpenXM home page,
.RS
.I http://www.math.sci.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM or kan
.RE
This cite will be moved to
.RS
.I http://www.openxm.org/kan
.RE
in a future.


.SH Mails
Questions, comments and bug reports should be sent to
.IR kan@math.sci.kobe-u.ac.jp
Fixes are welcome too !

.SH AUTHOR
Kan/sm1 was originally written and is maintained by 
Nobuki Takayama (Kobe University).

.SH SEE ALSO
.IR asir (1),
.IR gap (1),
.IR maple (1),
.IR mathematica (1),
.IR tex (1),
.IR xdvi(1)

.SH COPYING
Kan/sm1 follows a BSD-like copyright.
See the COPYRIGHT file in the
distribution OpenXM/Copyright.
