@comment $OpenXM: OpenXM/src/asir-doc/parts/builtin/bit.texi,v 1.2 1999/12/21 02:47:33 noro Exp $
\BJP
@node bit 演算,,, 組み込み函数
@section bit 演算
\E
\BEG
@node Bit operations,,, Built-in Function
@section Bit operations
\E

@menu
* iand ior ixor::
* ishift::
@end menu

\JP @node iand ior ixor,,, bit 演算
\EG @node iand ior ixor,,, Bit operations
@subsection @code{iand}, @code{ior}, @code{ixor}
@findex iand
@findex ior
@findex ixor

@table @t
@item iand(@var{i1},@var{i2})
\JP :: bit ごとの and
\EG :: bitwise and
@item ior(@var{i1},@var{i2})
\JP :: bit ごとの or
\EG :: bitwise or
@item ixor(@var{i1},@var{i2})
\JP :: bit ごとの xor
\EG :: bitwise xor
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 整数
\EG integer
@item i1 i2
\JP 整数
\EG integer
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
整数 @var{i1}, @var{i2} の絶対値を bit 列とみて演算する. 
@item
引数の符号は無視し, 非負の値を返す. 
\E
\BEG
@item
The absolute value of the argument is regarded as a bit string.
@item
The sign of the argument is ignored and a non-negative integer is returned.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] ctrl("hex",1);
0x1
[1] iand(0xeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee,0x2984723234812312312);
0x4622224802202202
[2] ior(0xa0a0a0a0a0a0a0a0,0xb0c0b0b0b0b0b0b);
0xabacabababababab
[3] ixor(0xfffffffffff,0x234234234234);
0x2cbdcbdcbdcb
@end example

@table @t
\JP @item 参照
\EG @item References
@fref{ishift}.
@end table

\JP @node ishift,,, bit 演算
\EG @node ishift,,, Bit operations
@subsection @code{ishift}
@findex ishift

@table @t
@item ishift(@var{i},@var{count})
:: bit shift
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 整数
\EG integer
@item i count
\JP 整数
\EG integer
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
整数 @var{i} の絶対値を bit 列とみて shift する. 
@item
@var{i} の符号は無視し, 非負の値を返す. 
@item
@var{count} が正ならば右 shift, 負ならば左 shift を行う. 
\E
\BEG
@item
The absolute value of @var{i} is regarded as a bit string.
@item
The sign of @var{i} is ignored and a non-negative integer is returned.
@item
If @var{count} is positive, then @var{i} is shifted to the right.
If @var{count} is negative, then @var{i} is shifted to the left.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] ctrl("hex",1);
0x1
[1] ishift(0x1000000,12); 
0x1000
[2] ishift(0x1000,-12);   
0x1000000
[3] ixor(0x1248,ishift(1,-16)-1);
@end example

@table @t
\JP @item 参照
\EG @item References
@fref{iand ior ixor}.
@end table
