@comment $OpenXM$
\BJP
@node 数値函数,,, 組み込み函数
@section 数値函数
\E
\BEG
@node Numerical functions,,, Built-in Function
@section Numerical functions
\E

@menu
* dacos dasin datan dcos dsin dtan::
* dabs dexp dlog dsqrt::
* ceil floor rint dceil dfloor drint::
@end menu

\JP @node dacos dasin datan dcos dsin dtan,,, 数値函数
\EG @node dacos dasin datan dcos dsin dtan,,, Numerical functions
@subsection @code{dacos}, @code{dasin}, @code{datan}, @code{dcos}, @code{dsin}, @code{dtan}
@findex dacos
@findex dasin
@findex datan
@findex dcos
@findex dsin
@findex dtan

@table @t
@item dacos(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 Arccos(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of Arccos of @var{num}.
@item dasin(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 Arcsin(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of Arcsin of @var{num}.
@item datan(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 Arctan(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of Arctan of @var{num}.
@item dcos(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 cos(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of cos of @var{num}.
@item dsin(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 sin(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of sin of @var{num}.
@item dtan(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 tan(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of tan of @var{num}.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 倍精度浮動小数
\EG floating point number
@item num
\JP 数
\EG number
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
三角関数、逆三角関数を数値的に計算する.
@item
これらの函数は C 言語の標準数学ライブラリを用いる.
したがって, 計算結果はオペレーティングシステムとコンパイラに依存する.
@item
@@pi や @@i などのシンボルを引数に与えることはできない.
\E
\BEG
@item
Compute numerical values of trigonometric functions.
@item
These functions use the standard mathematical library of C language.
So results depend on operating systems and a C compilers.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] 4*datan(1);
3.14159
@end example

\JP @node dabs dexp dlog dsqrt,,, 数値函数
\EG @node dabs dexp dlog dsqrt,,, Numerical functions
@subsection @code{dabs}, @code{dexp}, @code{dlog}, @code{dsqrt}
@findex dabs
@findex dexp
@findex dlog
@findex dsqrt

@table @t
@item dabs(@var{num})
\JP :: 絶対値 |@var{num}| を求める. 
\EG :: Get the absolute value of @var{num}.
@item dexp(@var{num})
\JP :: 函数値 exp(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of expornent of @var{num}.
@item dlog(@var{num})
\JP :: 対数値 log(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of logarithm of @var{num}.
@item dsqrt(@var{num})
\JP :: 平行根 sqrt(@var{num}) を求める. 
\EG :: Get the value of square root of @var{num}.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 倍精度浮動小数
\EG floating point number
@item num
\JP 数
\EG number
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
初等函数を数値的に計算する.
@item
これらの函数は C 言語の標準数学ライブラリを用いる.
したがって, 計算結果はオペレーティングシステムとコンパイラに依存する.
@item
@@pi や @@i などのシンボルを引数に与えることはできない.
\E
\BEG
@item
Compute numerical values of elementary functions.
@item
These functions use the standard mathematical library of C language.
So results depend on operating systems and a C compilers.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] dexp(1);
2.71828
@end example

\JP @node ceil floor rint dceil dfloor drint,,, 数値函数
\EG @node ceil floor rint dceil dfloor drint,,, Numerical functions
@subsection @code{ceil}, @code{floor}, @code{rint}, @code{dceil}, @code{dfloor}, @code{drint}
@findex ceil
@findex floor
@findex rint
@findex dceil
@findex dfloor
@findex drint

@table @t
@item ceil(@var{num})
@item dceil(@var{num})
\JP :: @var{num} より大きい最小の整数を求める. 
\EG :: Get the ceiling integer of @var{num}.
@item floor(@var{num})
@item dfloor(@var{num})
\JP :: @var{num} より小さい最大の整数を求める. 
\EG :: Get the floor integer of @var{num}.
@item rint(@var{num})
@item drint(@var{num})
\JP :: @var{num} を整数にまるめる. 
\EG :: Get the round integer of @var{num}.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 整数
\EG integer
@item num
\JP 数
\EG number
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
@code{dceil}, @code{dfloor}, @code{drint} は
@code{ceil}, @code{floor}, @code{rint} の別名である.
@item
浮動小数を整数にまるめる方法は, オペレーティングシステムとコンパイラに依存する.
@item
@@pi や @@i などのシンボルを引数に与えることはできない.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] dceil(1.1);
1
@end example
