@comment $OpenXM: OpenXM/src/asir-doc/parts/builtin/string.texi,v 1.5 2000/03/02 07:46:14 noro Exp $
\BJP
@node 文字列に関する演算,,, 組み込み函数
@section 文字列に関する演算
\E
\BEG
@node Strings,,, Built-in Function
@section Strings
\E

@menu
* rtostr::
* strtov::
* eval_str::
* strtoascii asciitostr::
* str_len str_chr sub_str::
@end menu

\JP @node rtostr,,, 文字列に関する演算
\EG @node rtostr,,, Strings
@subsection @code{rtostr}
@findex rtostr

@table @t
@item rtostr(@var{obj})
\JP :: @var{obj} を文字列に変える. 
\EG :: Convert @var{obj} into a string.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 文字列
\EG string
@item obj
\JP 任意
\EG arbitrary
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
任意のオブジェクト @var{obj} を文字列に変える. 
@item
整数などを文字列に変換して変数名と結合することにより, 
添字付きの不定元を生成する場合に多く用いられる. 
@item
逆に, 文字列を不定元に変換する時には, @code{strtov} を用いる. 
\E
\BEG
@item
Convert an arbitrary object @var{obj} into a string.
@item
This function is convenient to create variables with numbered
(or indexed) names by converting integers into strings and appending them
to some name strings.
@item
Use @code{strtov()} for inverse conversion from string to indeterminate.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] A=afo;
afo
[1] type(A);
2
[2] B=rtostr(A); 
afo
[3] type(B);
7
[4] B+"1";
afo1
@end example

@table @t
\JP @item 参照
\EG @item References
@fref{strtov}, @fref{type}.
@end table

\JP @node strtov,,, 文字列に関する演算
\EG @node strtov,,, Strings
@subsection @code{strtov}
@findex strtov

@table @t
@item strtov(@var{str})
\JP :: @var{str} (文字列) を不定元に変える. 
\EG :: Convert a string @var{str} into an indeterminate.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP 不定元
\EG intederminate
@item str
\JP 不定元として変換可能な文字列
\EG string which is valid to constitute an indeterminate.
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
不定元として変換可能な文字列を不定元に変える. 
@item
不定元として変換可能な文字列とは, 英小文字で始まり, 
英字, 数字および記号 @code{_} で作られる文字列である. 
@item
@code{rtostr()} と組合せて, プログラム中で自動的に不定元を生成したい時に
用いられる. 
\E
\BEG
@item
Convert a string that is valid for an indeterminate into an indeterminate
which have @var{str} as its print name.
@item
The valid string for an indeterminate is such a string that begins
with a small alphabetical letter possibly followed by any string composed
of alphabetical letters, digits or a symbol @samp{_}.
@item
Use the command to create indeterminates dynamically in programs.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] A="afo";
afo
[1] for (I=0;I<3;I++) @{B=strtov(A+rtostr(I)); print([B,type(B)]);@}
[afo0,2]
[afo1,2]
[afo2,2]
@end example

@table @t
\JP @item 参照
\EG @item References
@fref{rtostr}, @fref{type}, @fref{uc}.
@end table

\JP @node eval_str,,, 文字列に関する演算
\EG @node eval_str,,, Strings
@subsection @code{eval_str}
@findex eval_str

@table @t
@item eval_str(@var{str})
\JP :: @var{str} (文字列) を評価する. 
\EG :: Evaluates a string @var{str}.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP オブジェクト
\EG object
@item str
\JP @b{Asir} の parser が受理可能な文字列
\EG string which can be accepted by @b{Asir} parser
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
@b{Asir} の parser が受理可能な文字列を評価してその結果を返す. 
@item
評価可能な文字列は, 式を表すものに限る. 
@item
論理的には @code{rtostr()} の逆関数となる. 
\E
\BEG
@item
This function evaluates a string which can be accepted by @b{Asir} parser
and returns the result.
@item
The input string should represent an expression.
@item
This functions is the inversion function of @code{rtostr()}.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] eval_str("1+2");
3
[1] fctr(eval_str(rtostr((x+y)^10)));
[[1,1],[x+y,10]]
@end example

@table @t
\JP @item 参照
\EG @item References
@fref{rtostr}
@end table

\JP @node strtoascii asciitostr,,, 文字列に関する演算
\EG @node strtoascii asciitostr,,, Strings
@subsection @code{strtoascii}, @code{asciitostr}
@findex strtoascii
@findex asciitostr

@table @t
@item strtoascii(@var{str})
\JP :: 文字列をアスキーコードで表す. 
\EG :: Converts a string into a sequence of ASCII codes.
@item asciitostr(@var{list})
\JP :: アスキーコードの列を文字列に変換する. 
\EG :: Converts a sequence of ASCII codes into a string.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP @code{strtoascii()}:リスト; @code{asciitostr()}:文字列
\EG @code{strtoascii()}:list; @code{asciitostr()}:string
@item str
\JP 文字列
\EG string
@item list
\JP 1 以上 256 未満の整数からなるリスト
\EG list containing positive integers less than 256.
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
@code{strtoascii()} は文字列を整数のリストに変換する. 各
整数は文字列のアスキーコードを表す. 
@item
@code{asciitostr()} は @code{asciitostr()} の逆関数である. 
\E
\BEG
@item
@code{strtoascii()} converts a string into a list of integers
which is a representation of the string by the ASCII code.
@item
@code{asciitostr()} is the inverse of @code{asciitostr()}.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[0] strtoascii("abcxyz");
[97,98,99,120,121,122]
[1] asciitostr(@@);
abcxyz
[2] asciitostr([256]);
asciitostr : argument out of range
return to toplevel
@end example

\JP @node str_len str_chr sub_str,,, 文字列に関する演算
\EG @node str_len str_chr sub_str,,, Strings
@subsection @code{str_len}, @code{str_chr}, @code{sub_str}
@findex str_len
@findex str_chr
@findex sub_str

@table @t
@item str_len(@var{str})
\JP :: 文字列の長さを返す. 
\EG :: Returns the length of a string.
@item str_chr(@var{str},@var{start},@var{c})
\JP :: 文字が最初に現れる位置を返す. 
\EG :: Returns the position of the first occurrence of a character in a string.
@item sub_str(@var{str},@var{start},@var{end})
\JP :: 部分文字列を返す. 
\EG :: Returns a substring of a string.
@end table

@table @var
@item return
\JP @code{str_len()}, @code{str_chr()}:整数; @code{sub_str()}:文字列
\EG @code{str_len()}, @code{str_chr()}:integer; @code{sub_str()}:string
@item str c
\JP 文字列
\EG string
@item start end
\JP 非負整数
\EG non-negative integer
@end table

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item @code{str_len()} は文字列の長さを返す. 
@item @code{str_chr()} は @var{str} の @var{start} 番目の文字からスキャンして
最初に @var{c} の最初の文字が現れた位置を返す. 文字列の先頭は 0 番目とする. 
指定された文字が現れない場合には -1 を返す.   
@item @code{sub_str()} は, @var{str} の @var{start} 番目から @var{end} 番目
までの部分文字列を生成し返す. 
\E
\BEG
@item @code{str_len()} returns the length of a string.
@item @code{str_chr()} scans a string @var{str} from the @var{start}-th
character and returns the position of the first occurrence 
of the first character of a string @var{c}. Note that the top of a string
is the 0-th character. It returns -1 if the character does not appear.
@item @code{sub_str()} generates a substring of @var{str} containing
characters from the @var{start}-th one to the @var{end}-th one.
\E
@end itemize

@example
[185] Line="123 456 (x+y)^3";
123 456 (x+y)^3
[186] Sp1 = str_chr(Line,0," ");
3
[187] D0 = eval_str(sub_str(Line,0,Sp1-1));
123
[188] Sp2 = str_chr(Line,Sp1+1," ");
7
[189] D1 = eval_str(sub_str(Line,Sp1+1,Sp2-1));
456
[190] C = eval_str(sub_str(Line,Sp2+1,str_len(Line)-1));
x^3+3*y*x^2+3*y^2*x+y^3
@end example
