@comment $OpenXM: OpenXM/src/asir-doc/parts/appendix.texi,v 1.15 2018/03/28 08:43:19 takayama Exp $
\BJP
@node 付録,,, Top
@appendix 付録
\E
\BEG
@node Appendix,,, Top
@appendix Appendix
\E

@menu
\BJP
* 文法の詳細::
* 添付のユーザ定義函数ファイル::
* 入力インタフェース::
* ライブラリインタフェース::
* 変更点::
* 文献::
\E
\BEG
* Details of syntax:: 
* Files of user defined functions::
* Input interfaces::
* Library interfaces::
* Changes:: 
* References::
\E
@end menu

\BJP
@node 文法の詳細,,, 付録
@section 文法の詳細
\E
\BEG
@node Details of syntax,,, Appendix
@section Details of syntax
\E

@example
\BJP
<式>: 
    @samp{(}<式>@samp{)}
    <式> <二項演算子> <式>
    @samp{+} <式>
    @samp{-} <式>
    <左辺値>
    <左辺値> <代入演算子> <式>
    <左辺値> @samp{++}
    <左辺値> @samp{--}
    @samp{++} <左辺値>
    @samp{--} <左辺値>
    @samp{!} <式>
    <式> @samp{?} <式> @samp{:} <式>
    <函数> @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)}
    <函数> @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{|} <オプション並び> @samp{)}
    <文字列>
    <指数ベクトル>
    <アトム>
    <リスト>
\E
\BEG
<expression>:
    @samp{(}<expression>@samp{)}
    <expression> <binary operator> <expression>
    @samp{+} <expression>
    @samp{-} <expression>
    <left value>
    <left value> <assignment operator> <expression>
    <left value> @samp{++}
    <left value> @samp{--}
    @samp{++} <left value>
    @samp{--} <left value>
    @samp{!} <expression>
    <expression> @samp{?} <expression> @samp{:} <expression>
    <function> @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)}
    <function> @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{|} <option list> @samp{)}
    <string>
    <exponent vector>
    <atom>
    <list>
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{さまざまな式}.)
\EG (@xref{various expressions}.)

@example
\BJP
<左辺値>:
    <変数> [@samp{[}<式>@samp{]}]*
\E
\BEG
<left value>:
    <program variable> [@samp{[}<expression>@samp{]}]*
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<二項演算子>:
    @samp{+} @samp{-} @samp{*} @samp{/} @samp{%} @samp{^}(冪) 
\E
\BEG
<binary operator>:
    @samp{+} @samp{-} @samp{*} @samp{/} @samp{%} @samp{^}(exponentiation)
    @samp{==} @samp{!=} @samp{<} @samp{>} @samp{<=} @samp{>=} @samp{&&} @samp{||}
\E
    @samp{==} @samp{!=} @samp{<} @samp{>} @samp{<=} @samp{>=} @samp{&&} @samp{||}
@end example

@example
\JP <代入演算子>:
\EG <assignment operator>:
    @samp{=} @samp{+=} @samp{-=} @samp{*=} @samp{/=} @samp{%=} @samp{^=} 
@end example

@example
\BJP
<式並び>:
    <空>
    <式> [@samp{,} <式>]*
\E
\BEG
<expr list>:
    <empty>
    <expression> [@samp{,} <expression>]*
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<オプション>:
    alphabet で始まる文字列 @samp{=} <式>
\E
\BEG
<option>:
    Character sequence beginning with an alphabetical letter @samp{=} <expr>
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<オプション並び>:
    <オプション>
    <オプション> [@samp{,} <オプション>]*
\E
\BEG
<option list>:
    <option>
    <option> [@samp{,} <option>]*
\E
@end example


@example
\BJP
<リスト>:
    @samp{[} <式並び> @samp{]}
\E
\BEG
<list>:
    @samp{[} <expr list> @samp{]}
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<変数>: 
    大文字で始まる文字列 (X,Y,Japan など)
\E
\BEG
<program variable>:
   Sequence of alphabetical letters or numeric digits or @code{_}
   that begins with a capital alphabetical letter
   (X,Y,Japan etc.)
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{変数および不定元}.)
\EG (@xref{variables and indeterminates}.)

@example
\BJP
<函数>:
   小文字で始まる文字列 (fctr,gcd など)
\E
\BEG
<function>:
   Sequence of alphabetical letters or numeric digits or @code{_}
   that begins with a small alphabetical letter
   (fctr,gcd etc.)
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<アトム>:
   <不定元>
   <数>
\E
\BEG
<atom>:
   <indeterminate>
   <number>
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<不定元>: 
   小文字で始まる文字列 (a,bCD,c1_2 など)
\E
\BEG
<indeterminate>:
   Sequence of alphabetical letters or numeric digits or @code{_}
   that begin with a small alphabetical letter
   (a,bCD,c1_2 etc.)
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{変数および不定元}.)
\EG (@xref{variables and indeterminates}.)

@example
\BJP
<数>: 
   <有理数>
   <浮動小数>
   <代数的数>
   <複素数>
\E
\BEG
<number>:
   <rational number>
   <floating point number>
   <algebraic number>
   <complex number>
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{数の型}.)
\EG (@xref{Types of numbers}.)

@example
\JP <有理数>:
\EG <rational number>:
   0, 1, -2, 3/4
@end example

@example
\JP <浮動小数>:
\EG <floating point number>:
   0.0, 1.2e10
@end example

@example
\JP <代数的数>: 
\EG <algebraic number>: 
   newalg(x^2+1), alg(0)^2+1
@end example
\JP (@xref{代数的数に関する演算}.)
\EG (@xref{Algebraic numbers}.)

@example
\JP <複素数>:
\EG <complex number>:
   1+@code{@@i}, 2.3*@code{@@i}
@end example

@example
\BJP
<文字列>:
   @samp{"} で囲まれた文字列 
\E
\BEG
<string>:
   character sequence enclosed by two @samp{"}'s.
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<指数ベクトル>:
   @samp{<<} <式並び> @samp{>>}
\E
\BEG
<exponent vector>:
   @samp{<<} <expr list> @samp{>>}
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{グレブナ基底の計算}.)
\EG (@xref{Groebner basis computation}.)

@example
\BJP
<文>:
    <式> <終端>
    <複文>
    @samp{break} <終端>
    @samp{continue} <終端>
    @samp{return} <終端>
    @samp{return} <式> <終端>
    @samp{if} @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)} <文>
    @samp{if} @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)} <文> @samp{else} <文>
    @samp{for} @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{;} <式並び> @samp{;} <式並び> @samp{)} <文>
    @samp{do} <文> @samp{while} @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)} <終端> 
    @samp{while} @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)} <文>
    @samp{def} <函数> @samp{(} <式並び> @samp{)} @samp{@{} <変数宣言> <文並び> @samp{@}}
    @samp{end(quit)} <終端> 
\E
\BEG
<statement>:
    <expression> <terminator>
    <compound statement>
    @samp{break} <terminator>
    @samp{continue} <terminator>
    @samp{return} <terminator>
    @samp{return} <expression> <terminator>
    @samp{if} @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)} <statement>
    @samp{if} @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)} <statement> @samp{else} <statement>
    @samp{for} @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{;} <expr list> @samp{;} <expr list> @samp{)} <statement>
    @samp{do} <statement> @samp{while} @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)} <terminator>
    @samp{while} @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)} <statement>
    @samp{def} <function> @samp{(} <expr list> @samp{)} @samp{@{} <variable declaration> <stat list> @samp{@}}
    @samp{end(quit)} <terminator>
\E
@end example
\JP (@xref{文}.)
\EG (@xref{statements}.)

@example
\JP <終端>:
\EG <terminator>:
    @samp{;} @samp{$}
@end example

@example
\BJP
<変数宣言>:
    [@samp{extern} <変数> [@samp{,} <変数>]* <終端>]*
\E
\BEG
<variable declaration>:
    [@samp{extern} <program variable> [@samp{,} <program variable>]* <terminator>]*
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<複文>:
    @samp{@{} <文並び> @samp{@}}
\E
\BEG
<compound statement>:
    @samp{@{} <stat list> @samp{@}}
\E
@end example

@example
\BJP
<文並び>:
    [<文>]*
\E
\BEG
<stat list>:
    [<statement>]*
\E
@end example

\BJP
@node 添付のユーザ定義函数ファイル,,, 付録
@section 添付のユーザ定義函数ファイル
\E
\BEG
@node Files of user defined functions,,, Appendix
@section Files of user defined functions
\E

@noindent
\BJP
標準ライブラリディレクトリ (デフォルトでは @samp{/usr/local/lib/asir}) には
いくつかのユーザ定義函数ファイルがおかれている. これらのうちの主なものについて
説明する. 
\E
\BEG
There are several files of user defined functions under the standard
library directory. (@samp{/usr/local/lib/asir} by default.)
Here, we explain some of them.
\E

@table @samp
@item fff
\JP 大標数素体および標数 2 の有限体上の一変数多項式因数分解 (@xref{有限体に関する演算}.)
\EG Univariate factorizer over large finite fields (@xref{Finite fields}.)
@item gr
\JP グレブナ基底計算パッケージ.  (@xref{グレブナ基底の計算}.)
\EG Groebner basis package.  (@xref{Groebner basis computation}.)
@item sp
\JP 代数的数の演算および因数分解, 最小分解体. (@xref{代数的数に関する演算}.)
\EG Operations over algebraic numbers and factorization, Splitting fields. (@xref{Algebraic numbers}.)
@item alpi
@itemx bgk
@itemx cyclic
@itemx katsura
@itemx kimura
\JP グレブナ基底計算において, ベンチマークその他で用いられる例. 
\EG Example polynomial sets for benchmarks of Groebner basis computation.
(@xref{katsura hkatsura cyclic hcyclic}.)
@item defs.h
\JP いくつかのマクロ定義. (@xref{プリプロセッサ}.)
\EG Macro definitions. (@xref{preprocessor}.)
@item fctrtest
\BJP
整数上の多項式の因数分解のテスト. REDUCE の @samp{factor.tst} および
重複度の大きいいくつかの例を含む. これは, @code{load()} すると
直ちに計算が始まる. 入手した @b{Asir} が正しく動作しているかの
テストにも使うことができる. 
\E
\BEG
Test program of factorization of integral polynomials.
It includes  @samp{factor.tst} of REDUCE and several examples
for large multiplicity factors.  If this file is @code{load()}'ed,
computation will begin immediately.
You may use it as a first test whether @b{Asir} at you hand runs
correctly.
\E
@item fctrdata
\BJP
@samp{fctrtest} で使われている例を含む, 因数分解テスト用の例. 
@code{Alg[]} に収められている例は, @code{af()} (@ref{asq af af_noalg}) 用の例である. 
\E
\BEG
This contains example polynomials for factorization.  It includes
polynomials used in @samp{fctrtest}.
Polynomials contained in vector @code{Alg[]} is for the algebraic
factorization @code{af()}. (@xref{asq af af_noalg}.)
\E
@example
[45] load("sp")$
[84] load("fctrdata")$
[175] cputime(1)$
0msec
[176] Alg[5];
x^9-15*x^6-87*x^3-125
0msec
[177] af(Alg[5],[newalg(Alg[5])]);
[[1,1],[75*x^2+(10*#0^7-175*#0^4-470*#0)*x
+(3*#0^8-45*#0^5-261*#0^2),1],
[75*x^2+(-10*#0^7+175*#0^4+395*#0)*x
+(3*#0^8-45*#0^5-261*#0^2),1],
[25*x^2+(25*#0)*x+(#0^8-15*#0^5-87*#0^2),1],
[x^2+(#0)*x+(#0^2),1],[x+(-#0),1]]
3.600sec + gc : 1.040sec
@end example
@item ifplot
\BJP
描画 (@ref{ifplot conplot plot polarplot plotover}) のための例. @code{IS[]} には有名な
曲線の例, 変数 @code{H, D, C, S} にはトランプのハート, ダイヤ, クラブ, 
スペード (らしき) 曲線の例が入っている. 
\E
\BEG
Examples for plotting. (@xref{ifplot conplot plot polarplot plotover}.)
Vector @code{IS[]} contains several famous algebraic curves.
Variables @code{H, D, C, S} contains something like the suits
(Heart, Diamond, Club, and Spade) of cards.
\E
@item num
\JP 数に関する簡単な演算函数の例. 
\EG Examples of simple operations on numbers.
@item mat
\JP 行列に関する簡単な演算函数の例. 
\EG Examples of simple operations on matrices.
@item ratint
\BJP
有理函数の不定積分. @samp{sp}, @samp{gr} が必要. @code{ratint()} という
函数が定義されているが, その返す結果はやや複雑である. 例で説明する. 
\E
\BEG
Indefinite integration of rational functions.  For this,
files @samp{sp} and @samp{gr} is necessary.  A function @code{ratint()}
is defined.  Its returns a rather complex result.
\E
@example
[0] load("gr")$
[45] load("sp")$
[84] load("ratint")$
[102] ratint(x^6/(x^5+x+1),x);
[1/2*x^2,
[[(#2)*log(-140*x+(-2737*#2^2+552*#2-131)),
161*t#2^3-23*t#2^2+15*t#2-1],
[(#1)*log(-5*x+(-21*#1-4)),21*t#1^2+3*t#1+1]]]
@end example
\BJP
この例では, @code{x^6/(x^5+x+1)} の不定積分の計算を行っている. 
結果は 2 つの要素からなるリストで, 第 1 要素は不定積分の有理部分, 
第 2 要素は対数部分を表す. 対数部分は更にリストとなっていて, 各要素は, 
@code{[root*log(poly),defpoly]} という形をしている. これは, 不定積分に
おいては, @code{defpoly} の全ての根 @code{root} に対して @code{root*log(poly)}
を作りそれらを足し合わせるという意味である. ここで @code{poly} は
@code{root} を含んでいて, @code{root} を入れ替える場合には @code{poly}
に対しても同じ操作を行うものとする. この操作を, 結果の第 2 要素の
各成分に対して行って, 全てを足し合わせたものが対数部分となる. 
\E
\BEG
In this example, indefinite integral of the rational function
 @code{x^6/(x^5+x+1)} is computed.
The result is a list which comprises two elements:
The first element is the rational part of the integral;
The second part is the logarithmic part of the integral.
The logarithmic part is again a list which comprises finite number of
elements, each of which is of form @code{[root*log(poly),defpoly]}.
This pair should be interpreted to sum up
the expression @code{root*log(poly)}
through all @b{root}'s @code{root}'s of the @code{defpoly}.
Here, @code{poly} contains @code{root}, and substitution for @code{root}
is equally applied to @code{poly}.
The logarithmic part in total is obtained by applying such
interpretation to all element pairs in the second element of the
result and then summing them up all.
\E
@item primdec
\BJP
有理数体上の多項式イデアルの準素イデアル分解とその根基の素イデアル分解
(@pxref{primadec primedec}).
\E
\BEG
Primary ideal decomposition of polynomial ideals and prime compotision
of radicals over the rationals (@pxref{primadec primedec}).
\E
@item primdec_mod
\BJP
有限体上の多項式イデアルの根基の素イデアル分解
(@pxref{primedec_mod}).
\E
\BEG
Prime decomposition of radicals of polynomial ideals
over finite fields (@pxref{primedec_mod}).
\E
@item bfct
\BJP
b 関数の計算.
\E
\BEG
Computation of b-function.
\E
(@pxref{bfunction bfct generic_bfct ann ann0}).
@end table

\BJP
@node 入力インタフェース,,, 付録
@section 入力インタフェース
\E
\BEG
@node Input interfaces,,, Appendix
@section Input interfaces
\E

\BJP
DOS 版, Windows 版では入力インタフェースと
してコマンドライン編集およびヒストリ置き換えが組み込まれている. UNIX 版では
このような機能は組み込まれていないが, 以下で述べるような入力インタフェース
が用意されている. これらは @b{Asir} バイナリとともに ftp 可能である. 
ftp server に関しては @xref{入手方法}.

Windows 版 @samp{asirgui.exe} は, 通常の Windows における慣習とは異なる
形のコピーペースト機能を提供している. Window 上に表示されている文字列
に対しマウス左ボタンを押しながらドラッグすると文字列が選択される. 
ボタンを離すと反転表示が元に戻るが, その文字列はコピーバッファに
取り込まれている. マウス右ボタンを押すと, コピーバッファ内の文字列が
現在のカーソル位置に挿入される. 既に表示された部分は readonly
であり, その部分を改変できないことに注意して欲しい. 
\E
\BEG
A command line editing facility and a history
substitution facility are built-in for DOS, Windows version
of @b{Asir}. UNIX versions of @b{Asir} do not have such built-in facilities.
Instead, the following input interfaces are prepared. This are also available
from our ftp server. As for our ftp server @xref{How to get Risa/Asir}.

On Windows, @samp{asirgui.exe} has a copy and paste functionality
different from Windows convention. Press the left button of the mouse
and drag the mouse cursor on a text, then the text is selected and is
highlighted.  When the button is released, highlighted text returns to
the normal state and it is saved in the copy buffer.  If the right
button is pressed, the text in the copy buffer is inserted at the
current text cursor position. Note that the existing text is read-only and 
one cannot modify it.
\E

@menu
* fep::
* asir.el::
@end menu

\JP @node fep,,, 入力インタフェース
\EG @node fep,,, Input interfaces
@subsection fep

@noindent
\BJP
fep とは, SRA の歌代氏により開発されたコマンドライン編集, ヒストリ置き換え
用の入力フロントエンドである. このプログラムの元で @samp{asir} を起動する
ことにより vi あるいは emacs 風のコマンドライン編集および csh 風のヒストリ
置き換えが可能になる. 
\E
\BEG
Fep is a general purpose front end processor. The author is
K. Utashiro (SRA Inc.).

Under fep,
emacs- or vi-like command line editing and csh-like history substitution are
available for UNIX commands, including @samp{asir}.
\E
@example
% fep asir
...
[0] fctr(x^5-1);
[[1,1],[x-1,1],[x^4+x^3+x^2+x+1,1]]
[1] !!                              /* !!+Return                      */
\BJP
fctr(x^5-1);                        /* 直前の入力が現れて編集できる */
...                                 /* 編集+Return                  */
\E
\BEG
fctr(x^5-1);                        /* The last input appears.        */
...                                 /* Edit+Return                    */
\E
fctr(x^5+1);
[[1,1],[x+1,1],[x^4-x^3+x^2-x+1,1]]
@end example

@noindent
\BJP
fep はフリーソフトでソースが入手可能であるが, オリジナルのものは make できる
機種 (OS) が限られている. いくつかの機種上で動作するように我々が改造したもの
が, ftp で入手可能である.
\E
\BEG
Fep is a free software and the source is available. However
machines or operating systems on which the original one can run are limited.
The modified version by us running on several unsupported environments
is available from our ftp server.
\E

\JP @node asir.el,,, 入力インタフェース
\EG @node asir.el,,, Input interfaces
@subsection asir.el

@noindent
\BJP
@samp{asir.el} は, @b{Asir} の GNU Emacs インタフェースである (著者は
宮嶋光治氏 (@code{YVE25250@@pcvan.or.jp}).  @samp{asir.el} においては, 
通常の emacs で可能な編集機能の他に, ファイル名, コマンド名の completion
が実現されている. 
\E
\BEG
@samp{asir.el} is a GNU Emacs interface for @b{Asir}.
The author is Koji Miyajima (@code{YVE25250@@pcvan.or.jp}).
In @samp{asir.el}, completion of file names and command names is
realized other than the ordinary editing functions
which are available on Emacs.
\E

@noindent
\BJP
@samp{asir.el} は PC-VAN で
既に公開されているが, 今回の改訂に伴う変更を行ったものが, やはり ftp で
入手可能である. 
\E
\BEG
@samp{asir.el} is distributed on PC-VAN. The version where several
changes have been made according to the current version of @b{Asir}
is available via ftp.
\E

@noindent
\JP セットアップ, 使用方法は, @samp{asir.el} の先頭に記述されている. 
\BEG
The way of setting up and the usage can be found at the top of
@samp{asir.el}.
\E

\BJP
@node ライブラリインタフェース,,, 付録
@section ライブラリインタフェース
\E
\BEG
@node Library interfaces,,, Appendix
@section Library interfaces
\E

\BJP
@b{Asir} の提供する機能を他のプログラムから使用する方法として, @b{OpenXM} による
他に, ライブラリの直接リンクによる方法が可能である. ライブラリは,
GC ライブラリである @samp{libasir-gc.a} とともに @b{OpenXM}
distribution (@code{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM}) に含まれる. 
現状では@b{OpenXM} インタフェースのみが公開されているため, 以下では
@b{OpenXM} がインストールされていると仮定する. @b{OpenXM} root ディレクトリを
@code{$OpenXM_HOME}と書く. ライブラリファイルは全て @samp{$OpenXM_HOME/lib}
におかれている. ライブラリには以下の 3 種類がある. 
\E
\BEG
It is possible to link an @b{Asir} library to use the functionalities of
@b{Asir} from other programs.
The necessary libraries are included in the @b{OpenXM} distribution
@ifhtml
(<A HREF="http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM">OpenXM </A>)
@end ifhtml
(@code{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM}).
At present only the @b{OpenXM} interfaces are available. Here we assume
that @b{OpenXM} is already installed. In the following 
@code{$OpenXM_HOME} denotes the @b{OpenXM} root directory.
All the library files are placed in @samp{$OpenXM_HOME/lib}.
There are three kinds of libraries as follows.
\E
@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{libasir.a}
@*
\BJP
@b{PARI}, @b{X11} 関連の機能を含まない. 
リンクには @samp{libasir-gc.a} のみが必要. 
\E
\BEG
It does not contain the functionalities related to @b{PARI} and @b{X11}.
Only @samp{libasir-gc.a} is necessary for linking.
\E

@item @samp{libasir_pari.a}
@*
\BJP
@b{X11} 関連の機能を含まない. リンクには @samp{libasir-gc.a},
@samp{libpari.a} が必要.
\E
\BEG
It does not contain the functionalities related to @b{X11}.
@samp{libasir-gc.a}, @samp{libpari.a} are necessary for linking.
\E

@item @samp{libasir_pari_X.a}
@*
\BJP
全ての機能を含む. リンクには @samp{libasir-gc.a}, @samp{libpari.a}
および @b{X11} 関連のライブラリ指定が必要.
\E
\BEG
All the functionalities are included. @samp{libasir-gc.a}, @samp{libpari.a}
and libraries related to @b{X11} are necessary for linking.
\E
@end itemize
\BJP
提供されている関数は以下の通りである. 
\E
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{int asir_ox_init(int @var{byteorder})}
@*
\BJP
ライブラリの初期化. @var{byteorder} はメモリ上へのバイナリ CMO データ
への展開方法を指定する. @var{byteorder} が 0 のときマシン固有の byteorder
を用いる. 1 のとき network byteorder を用いる. 初期化に成功した場合 0,
失敗の時 -1 を返す. 
\E
\BEG
It initializes the library.
@var{byteorder} specifies the format of binary CMO data on the memory.
If @var{byteorder} is 0, the byteorder native to the machine is used.
If @var{byteorder} is 1, the network byteorder is used. It returns
0 if the initialization is successful, -1 otherwise.
\E

@item @code{void asir_ox_push_cmo(void *@var{cmo})}
@*
\BJP
メモリ上に置かれた CMO データを @b{Asir} の内部形式に変換してスタックに
push する. 
\E
\BJP
It converts CMO data pointed by @var{cmo} into an @b{Asir} object and
it pushes the object onto the stack.
\E

@item @code{int asir_ox_peek_cmo_size()}
@*
\BJP
スタックの最上位にある @b{Asir} データを CMO に変換したときのサイズを返す. 
変換不能な場合には -1 を返す. 
\E
\BEG
It returns the size of the object at the top of the stack as CMO object.
It returns -1 if the object cannot be converted into CMO object.
\E

@item @code{int asir_ox_pop_cmo(void *@var{cmo}, int @var{limit})}
@*
\BJP
スタックの最上位にある @b{Asir} データを pop し, CMO に変換して @var{cmo}で
指される配列に書き, CMO のサイズを返す. このとき, CMO のサイズが 
@var{limit} より大きい場合には -1 を返す. @var{cmo} は長さが少なくとも 
@var{limit}バイトの配列を指す必要がある. 変換された CMO を収容できる
配列の長さを知るために, @code{asir_ox_peek_cmo_size} を用いる. 
\E
\BEG
It pops an @b{Asir} object at the top of the stack and it converts
the object into CMO data. If the size of the CMO data is not greater
than @var{limit}, then the data is written in @var{cmo} and the size
is returned. Otherwise -1 is returned. The size of the array pointed
by @var{cmo} must be at least @var{limit}. In order to know the size
of converted CMO data in advance @code{asir_ox_peek_cmo_size} is called.
\E

@item @code{void asir_ox_push_cmd(int @var{cmd})}
@*
\BJP
スタックマシンコマンド @var{cmd} を実行する. 
\E
\BEG
It executes a stack machine command @var{cmd}.
\E

@item @code{void asir_ox_execute_string(char *@var{str})}
@*
\BJP
@b{Asir} が実行可能な文字列 @var{str} を実行し, その結果をスタックに push する.
\E
\BEG
It evaluates @var{str} as a string written in the @b{Asir} user language.
The result is pushed onto the stack.
\E
@end itemize

\BJP
include すべき header file は @samp{$OpenXM_HOME/include/asir/ox.h} である. 
この header file には, @b{OpenXM} に関する全ての tag, command の定義が含まれて
いる. 
次の例 (@samp{$OpenXM_HOME/doc/oxlib/test3.c}) は上記関数の使用
法を示す. 
\E
\BEG
A program calling the above functions should include 
@samp{$OpenXM_HOME/include/asir/ox.h}.
In this file all the definitions of @b{OpenXM} tags and commands.
The following example
(@samp{$OpenXM_HOME/doc/oxlib/test3.c}) illustrates the usage of
the above functions.
\E

@example
#include <asir/ox.h>
#include <signal.h>

main(int argc, char **argv)
@{
  char buf[BUFSIZ+1];
  int c;
  unsigned char sendbuf[BUFSIZ+10];
  unsigned char *result;
  unsigned char h[3];
  int len,i,j;
  static int result_len = 0;
  char *kwd,*bdy;
  unsigned int cmd;

  signal(SIGINT,SIG_IGN);
  asir_ox_init(1); /* 1: network byte order; 0: native byte order */
  result_len = BUFSIZ;
  result = (void *)malloc(BUFSIZ);
  while ( 1 ) @{
    printf("Input>"); fflush(stdout);
    fgets(buf,BUFSIZ,stdin);
    for ( i = 0; buf[i] && isspace(buf[i]); i++ );
    if ( !buf[i] )
      continue;
    kwd = buf+i;
    for ( ; buf[i] && !isspace(buf[i]); i++ );
    buf[i] = 0;
    bdy = buf+i+1;
    if ( !strcmp(kwd,"asir") ) @{
      sprintf(sendbuf,"%s;",bdy);
      asir_ox_execute_string(sendbuf);
    @} else if ( !strcmp(kwd,"push") ) @{
      h[0] = 0;
      h[2] = 0;
      j = 0;
      while ( 1 ) @{
        for ( ; (c= *bdy) && isspace(c); bdy++ );
        if ( !c )
          break;
        else if ( h[0] ) @{
          h[1] = c;
          sendbuf[j++] = strtoul(h,0,16);
          h[0] = 0;
        @} else
          h[0] = c;
        bdy++;
      @}
      if ( h[0] )
        fprintf(stderr,"Number of characters is odd.\n");
      else @{
        sendbuf[j] = 0;
        asir_ox_push_cmo(sendbuf);
      @}
    @} else if ( !strcmp(kwd,"cmd") ) @{
      cmd = atoi(bdy);
      asir_ox_push_cmd(cmd);
    @} else if ( !strcmp(kwd,"pop") ) @{
      len = asir_ox_peek_cmo_size();
      if ( !len )
        continue;
      if ( len > result_len ) @{
        result = (char *)realloc(result,len);
        result_len = len;
      @}
      asir_ox_pop_cmo(result,len);
      printf("Output>"); fflush(stdout);
      printf("\n");
      for ( i = 0; i < len; ) @{
        printf("%02x ",result[i]);
        i++;
        if ( !(i%16) )
          printf("\n");
      @}
      printf("\n");
    @}
  @}
@}
@end example
\BJP
このプログラムは, @var{keyword} @var{body} なる 1 行を入力として受け取り
@var{keyword} に応じて次のような動作を行う. 
\E
\BEG
This program receives a line in the form of @var{keyword} @var{body}
as an input and it executes the following operations according to
@var{keyword}.
\E
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{asir} @var{body}
@*
\BJP
@var{body} を @b{Asir} 言語で書かれた式とみなし, 実行結果をスタックに push する. 
@code{asir_ox_execute_string()} が用いられる. 
\E
\BEG
@var{body} is regarded as an expression written in the @b{Asir} user language.
The expression is evaluated and the result is pushed onto the stack.
@code{asir_ox_execute_string()} is called.
\E

@item @code{push} @var{body}
@*
\BJP
@var{body} を 16 進数で表示された CMO データとみなし, @b{Asir} オブジェクトに変換
してスタックに push する. @code{asir_ox_push_cmo()} が用いられる. 
\E
\BEG
@var{body} is regarded as a CMO object in the hexadecimal form.
The CMO object is converted into an @b{Asir} object and is pushed onto the stack.
@code{asir_ox_push_cmo()} is called.
\E

@item @code{pop}
@*
\BJP
スタック最上位のオブジェクトを CMO に変換し, 16 進数で表示する. 
@code{asir_ox_peek_cmo_size()} および @code{asir_ox_pop_cmo()} が用いられる. 
\E
\BEG
The object at the top of the stack is converted into a CMO object
and it is displayed in the hexadecimal form.
@code{asir_ox_peek_cmo_size()} and @code{asir_ox_pop_cmo()} are called.
\E

@item @code{cmd} @var{body}
@*
\BJP
@var{body} を SM コマンドとみなし, 実行する. 
@code{asir_ox_push_cmd()} が用いられる. 
\E
\BEG
@var{body} is regarded as an SM command and the command is executed.
@code{asir_ox_push_cmd()} is called.
\E
@end itemize

\BJP
@node 変更点,,, 付録
@section 変更点
\E
\BEG
@node Changes,,, Appendix
@section Appendix
\E

@menu
* ChangeLog::
* Version 990831::
* Version 950831::
* Version 940420::
@end menu

\JP @node ChangeLog,,, 変更点
\EG @node ChangeLog,,, Changes
@subsection ChangeLog
\BJP
詳しくは 
@uref{http://www.openxm.org}
の cvsweb を参照.
@itemize
@item 2018-03-28,  ctrl のスイッチ一覧の表示.  builtin/ctrl.c, ...
@item 2018-03-28, abs が pure func に. N!. top level の break. parse/puref.c, ...
@item 2018-03-27, ox_pari server に ox_reset が実装された. ox_pari/ox_pari.c
@item 2018-03-27, sin(数字) 等が不定元として大量に生成される問題の解決案. parse/puref.c, ...
@end itemize
\E

\BEG
See the Japanese document and the cvsweb at
@uref{http://www.openxm.org}
\E

\JP @node Version 990831,,, 変更点
\EG @node Version 990831,,, Changes
@subsection Version 990831

\BJP
4 年ぶりの大改訂. 整数の 32bit 化他, 中身はずいぶん変わっているものの, 
見掛けはそれほど変わっているようには見えない. むしろ, Windows 版などは, 
plot が使えないため, 退化している. 

旧版のユーザがもっとも注意すべき点は, 旧版で作った bsave file を読み込む
場合は @code{bload27} を使う必要がある, という点である. 
\E

\BEG
Four years have passed since the last distribution.
Though the look and feel seem unchanged, internally there are
several changes such as 32-bit representation of bignums.
Plotting facilities are not available on Windows.

If you have files created by @code{bsave} on the older version,
you have to use @code{bload27} to read such files.
\E

\JP @node Version 950831,,, 変更点
\EG @node Version 950831,,, Changes
@subsection Version 950831

@menu
\BJP
* デバッガ(変更)::
* 組み込み函数(変更)::
* グレブナ基底(変更)::
* その他(変更)::
\E
\BEG
* Debugger(Changes)::
* Built-in functions(Changes)::
* Groebner basis computation(Changes)::
* Others(Changes)::
\E
@end menu

\BJP
@node デバッガ(変更),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection デバッガ
\E
\BEG
@node Debugger(Changes),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection Debugger
\E

@itemize @bullet
@item
\JP 任意の時点にデバッグモードに入れる.
\EG One can enter the debug mode anytime.
@item
\JP @code{finish} コマンドの追加. 
\EG A command @code{finish} has been appended.
@item
\BJP
@code{up}, @code{down}, @code{frame} コマンドによる, 任意のスタックフレーム
の参照.
\E
\EG One can examine any stack frame with @code{up}, @code{down} and @code{frame}.
@item
\JP @code{trace} コマンドの追加. 
\EG A command @code{trace} has been appended.
@end itemize

\BJP
@node 組み込み函数(変更),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection 組み込み函数
\E
\BEG
@node Built-in functions(Changes),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection Built-in functions
\E

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
@code{sdiv()} などにおける, 主変数の指定のサポート. 
@item
@code{sdivm()} など, 有限体上での多項式除算の追加. 
@item
@code{det()}, @code{res()} などにおける, 有限体上での計算のサポート
@item
@code{vtol()} (ベクトルからリストへの変換) の追加. 
@item
@code{map()} の追加. 
\E
\BEG
@item
One can specify a main variable for @code{sdiv()} etc.
@item
Functions for polynomial division over finite fields
such as @code{sdivm()} have been appended.
@item
@code{det()}, @code{res()} can produce results over finite fields.
@item
@code{vtol()}, conversion from a vector to a list has been appended.
@item
@code{map()} has been appended.
\E
@end itemize

\BJP
@node グレブナ基底(変更),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection グレブナ基底
\E
\BEG
@node Groebner basis computation(Changes),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection Groebner basis computation
\E

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
グレブナ基底計算機能の組み込み函数化. 
@item
@code{grm()}, @code{hgrm()} が @code{gr()}, @code{hgr()} に変更. 
@item
@code{gr()}, @code{hgr()} において, 項順序の指定が必要になった. 
@item
項順序の指定方法が拡張された. 
@item
有限体上のグレブナ基底計算のサポート. 
@item
基底変換による辞書式順序グレブナ基底計算のサポート. 
@item
いくつかの新しい組み込み函数の提供. 
\E
\BEG
@item Functions for Groebner basis computation have been implemented
as built-in functions.
@item
@code{grm()} and @code{hgrm()} have been changed to @code{gr()} and
@code{hgr()} respectively.
@item
@code{gr()} and @code{hgr()} requires explicit specification of
an ordering type.
@item
Extension of specification of a term ordering type.
@item
Groebner basis computations over finite fields.
@item
Lex order Groebner basis computation via a modular change of ordering algorithm.
@item
Several new built-in functions.
\E
@end itemize

\BJP
@node その他(変更),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection その他
\E
\BEG
@node Others(Changes),,, Version 950831
@subsubsection Others
\E

@itemize @bullet
\BJP
@item
分散計算用ツール, 函数の追加.
@item
代数体上の GCD 計算におけるモジュラ計算の応用.
@item
イデアルの準素分解のサポート. 
@item
Windows への移植.
\E
\BEG
@item
Implementation of tools for distributed computation.
@item
Application of modular computation for GCD computation over algebraic number
fields.
@item
Implementation of primary decomposition of ideals.
@item
Porting to Windows.
\E
@end itemize

\JP @node Version 940420,,, 変更点
\EG @node Version 940420,,, Changes
@subsection Version 940420

@noindent
\JP 最初の公開版. 
\EG The first public version.

\BJP
@node 文献,,, 付録
@section 文献
\E
\BEG
@node References,,, Appendix
@section References
\E
@table @code
@item [Batut et al.]
Batut, C., Bernardi, D., Cohen, H., Olivier, M., "User's Guide to PARI-GP",
1993.
@item [Becker,Weispfenning] 
Becker, T., Weispfenning, V., "Groebner Bases", Graduate Texts in Math. 141,
Springer-Verlag, 1993.
@item [Boehm,Weiser] 
Boehm, H., Weiser, M., "Garbage Collection in an Uncooperative
Environment", Software Practice & Experience, September 1988, 807-820.
@item [Gebauer,Moeller] 
Gebauer, R., Moeller, H. M., "An installation of Buchberger's algorithm",
J. of Symbolic Computation 6, 275-286.
@item [Giovini et al.] 
Giovini, A., Mora, T., Niesi, G., Robbiano, L., Traverso, C., 
""One sugar cube, please" OR Selection strategies in the Buchberger algorithm",
Proc. ISSAC'91, 49-54.
@item [Noro,Takeshima] 
Noro, M., Takeshima, T., "Risa/Asir -- A Computer Algebra System",
Proc. ISSAC'92, 387-396.
@item [Noro,Yokoyama] 
Noro, M., Yokoyama, K., "A Modular Method to Compute the Rational Univariate
Representation of Zero-Dimensional Ideals", 
J. Symb. Comp. 28/1 (1999), 243-263.
@item [Saito,Sturmfels,Takayama]
Saito, M., Sturmfels, B., Takayama, N.,
"Groebner deformations of hypergeometric differential equations",
Algorithms and Computation in Mathematics 6, Springer-Verlag (2000).
@item [Shimoyama,Yokoyama]
Shimoyama, T., Yokoyama, K.,
"Localization and primary decomposition of polynomial ideals",
J. Symb. Comp. 22 (1996), 247-277.
@item [Shoup]
Shoup, V., "A new polynomial factorization algorithm and its implementation",
J. Symb. Comp. 20 (1995), 364-397.
@item [Traverso]
Traverso, C., "Groebner trace algorithms", Proc. ISSAC '88(LNCS 358), 125-138.
@item [Weber]
Weber, K., "The accelerated Integer GCD Algorithm", ACM TOMS, 21, 1(1995), 111-122.
@item [Yokoyama]
Yokoyama, K., "Prime decomposition of polynomial ideals over finite fields", 
Proc. ICMS, (2002), 217-227.
@end table
