@comment $OpenXM: OpenXM/src/asir-doc/parts/intro.texi,v 1.7 2014/12/14 00:53:08 takayama Exp $
@node Introduction,,, Top

@chapter Introduction

@menu
\JP * マニュアルの構成::
\EG * Organization of the Manual::
* Notation::
\JP * 入手方法::
\EG * How to get Risa/Asir::
\JP * Asir-contrib パッケージ::
\EG * Asir-contrib packages::
@end menu

\BJP
@node マニュアルの構成,,, Introduction
@section マニュアルの構成
\E
\BEG
@node Organization of the Manual,,, Introduction
@section Organization of the Manual
\E

@noindent
\JP このマニュアルの構成は次の通りである. 
\EG This manual is organized as follows.

@enumerate
\BJP
@item @b{Introduction} @*
マニュアルの構成, notation および入手方法

@item @b{Risa/Asir} @*
@b{Asir} の概要, インストレーション

@item @b{型} @*
@b{Asir} における型

@item @b{ユーザ言語 Asir} @*
@b{Asir} のユーザ言語の解説

@item @b{デバッガ} @*
ユーザ言語のデバッガの解説

@item @b{組み込み函数} @*
さまざまな組み込み函数の詳細

@item @b{分散計算} @*
分散計算機能に関する解説, 関数の詳細

@item @b{グレブナ基底の計算} @*
グレブナ基底に関する函数, 演算の解説

@item @b{代数的数に関する演算} @*
代数的数に関する函数, 演算の解説

@item @b{有限体に関する演算} @*
有限体に関する関数, 演算の解説

@item @b{付録} @*
文法の詳細, サンプルファイルの紹介, 
入力インタフェース, 変更点, 文献
\E
\BEG
@item 
@b{Introduction}
@*      
Organization of the Manual, notation and how to get Risa/Asir
      
@item
@b{Risa/Asir}
@*    
Summary of @b{Asir}, Installation
      
@item
@b{Types}
@*     
Types in @b{Asir}
      
@item
@b{Asir user language}
@*      
Description of @b{Asir} user language
      
@item
@b{Debugger}
@*      
Description of the debugger of @b{Asir} user language
      
@item
@b{Built-in function}
@*      
Detailed description of various built-in functions
      
@item @b{Distributed computation}
@*
Description of functions for distributed computation

@item
@b{Groebner bases}
@*      
Description of functions and operations for Groebner basis computation
      
@item
@b{Algebraic numbers}
@*      
Description of functions and operations for algebraic numbers
      
@item @b{Finite fields}
@*
Description of functions and operations on finite fields

@item
@b{Appendix}
@*
Syntax in detail, description of 
sample files, interfaces for input from keyboard, changes, references 
\E
@end enumerate

@node Notation,,, Introduction
@section Notation

@noindent
\JP このマニュアルでは, いくつかの記法上の慣習がある. それらについて説明する. 
\EG In this manual, we shall use several notations, which is described here

@itemize @bullet
@item
\JP 函数名は, タイプライタ体で表される. 
\EG The name of a function is written in a @code{typewriter} type
@*
@code{gcd()}, @code{gr()}

@item
\JP 函数の説明における函数の引数は, 斜字体で表される. 
\BEG
For the description of a function, its argument is written in a
@var{slanted} type.
\E

@var{int}, @var{poly}

@item
\JP ファイル名は, シングルクォートつきのタイプライタ体で表される. 
\EG A file name is written in a @samp{typewriter type with single quotes}
@*
@samp{dbxinit}, @samp{asir_plot}

@item
\JP 例は字下げされ, タイプライタ体で表される. 
\EG An example is indented and written in a @code{typewriter} type.

@example
[0] 1;
1
[1] quit;
@end example

@item
\JP 文献の参照は, @code{[]} つきのタイプライタ体で表される. 
\EG References are made by a @code{typewriter type bracketed by []}.
@*
@code{[Boehm,Weiser]}

@item
\BJP
函数の引数で, 省略可能なものは, @code{[]} で囲って示される. 
また, 0 個以上の繰り返しは, @code{[]*} で示される. 
\E
\BEG
Arguments (actual parameters) of a function are optional when they are
bracketed by @code{[]}'s.
The repeatable items (including non-existence of the item)
are bracketed by @code{[]*}'s.
\E
@*
@code{setprec([@var{n}])}, @code{diff(@var{rat}[,@var{varn}]*)}

@item
\BJP
shell (csh) のプロンプトは @code{%} で表される. ただし, インストール
時など, root として作業している場合のプロンプトは @code{#} で表される. 
\E
\BEG
The prompt from the shell (csh) is denoted, as it is, by @code{%}.
The prompt, however, is denoted by @code{#}, when you are assumed
to be working as the root, for example, at the installation.
\E

@example
% cat afo
afo
bfo
% su
Password:XXXX
# cp asir /usr/local/bin
# exit
%
@end example

@item
\BJP
有理整数環は @b{Z}, 有理数体は @b{Q}, 実数体は @b{R}, 複素数体は @b{C}
有限体は @b{GF(q)} (@b{q} は素数冪) で表す. 
\E
\BEG
The rational integer ring is denoted by @b{Z}, the rational number field
by @b{Q}, the real number field by @b{R}, and the complex number field by
@b{C}.
\E
@end itemize

\BJP
@node 入手方法,,, Introduction
@section 入手方法
\E
\BEG
@node How to get Risa/Asir,,, Introduction
@section How to get Risa/Asir
\E

@noindent
\BJP
Risa/Asir 
は以下から http で入手できる. 
\E
\BEG
Risa/Asir 
is available via http from
\E

@quotation
@uref{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/Asir}
@end quotation

\BJP
@node Asir-contrib パッケージ,,, Introduction
@section Asir-contrib パッケージ
\E
\BEG
@node Asir-contrib packages,,, Introduction
@section Asir-contrib packages
\E

@noindent
\BJP
Asir-contrib はユーザコミュニティが開発したパッケージ集である.
@uref{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM/Current/doc/index-doc-ja.html}
に文書がまとめてある.
このページには実験的機能のマニュアル、内部構造についての文書へのリンクもある.
Asir-contrib のバグについては開発者に直接連絡をとってほしい。
開発者が不明であったり現在メンテナーが不在のパッケージについては
asir2005@@math.kobe-u.ac.jp へ連絡してほしい.
\E
\BEG
Asir-contrib is a collection of packages developed by user communities.
Documents can be found at
@uref{http://www.math.kobe-u.ac.jp/OpenXM/Current/doc/index-doc.html}
This page also contains links to a manual on experimental functions
of Risa/Asir and documents on the internal structure of Risa/Asir.
As for bugs on Asir-contrib, please contact directly to the developer
of the package.
If you do not know who developes the package or there is no maintener on the package now, please send a mail to asir2005@@math.kobe-u.ac.jp.
\E

